Hello. Sorry, I'm a little bit late. I had issues with my browser. No, all good, all  good. You might see a missed call. I just tried calling you, but all good. You clicked  on the link, so you're all good. Okay. And then I also have someone that will be joining  from Nathan's ABA. Sure, yeah. His program supervisors. I asked her just to join maybe  for just like an hour of the call. Yeah. In case there was any like insight she could provide like  more recent programming. Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. Is there a specific time that you would  like her to join? I just want to make sure if she's coming for the hour, I want to make sure that  when I have her that I'll direct those questions that are related to that for that time um she should be joining right  at this okay um let me just double check that I didn't get an email from her I gave her the same  link that I used to click is that the right one to yeah yeah when she uh when she tries to join  the meeting I'll see a message pop up so no need to no need to worry there and then i'll and then i'll see her but thank you for like thank you for letting me know  okay some random person i'm like who's this yeah her name her name's jeanette in case you kind of  like see it pop up yeah you know it's the right person all good all right um but yeah um we can  get started um yeah if you want and then she can chime in when she we have housekeeping stuff to do  at the beginning so this works out perfectly anyways.  Yes.  Okay.  So my name is Alison and I'm going to be supporting you today with the determination of need.  So before we begin, I just need to confirm some information for privacy and confidentiality  purposes.  Okay?  So can you please provide me with your name, your phone number and address, please?  My name is Cathy Moe.  My address is 97 Donna Mora Crescent in Thornhill, Ontario. Do you  need the postal code as well? Sure, yes. L3T4K6. Okay. And my phone number is 416-894-7858.  Okay, perfect. So I've got that confirmed. So the next thing we need to do is just to confirm your  child's information to make sure that that is correct. So can I have your child's full name and birth date, please?  Full name is Nathan Elliott Yucheng Mo.  Birthday is December 7, 2008.  So that makes him 15.  Pardon?  That makes him 15?  Yes, yes, he's 15.  Okay.  Now, does Nathan identify as First Nations, M\u00e9tis, or Inuit?  No. Okay, perfect. Okay, so you're very familiar. he's 15. okay now does nathan identify as first nations metis or inuit no okay perfect though  okay so you're very familiar this is your third determination of needs correct  yes already a little bit unbelievable yes so you're very aware of the process so you know that the appointment today can vary in length anywhere from two hours to four hours depending on what we  have to discuss um so please with that, keeping in mind,  Kathy, let me know at any point in time that you need to take a break,  whether that be to have water,  it'll quick something to eat around lunchtime, things like that.  You let me know and then I'm able to support you.  So similarly to last year and the year before after today,  the results are going to be sent to be processed.  It's going to take approximately 10 business days.  Then you're going to receive a message in the portal.  It'll have your funding allotment and the funding agreement. So you'll have to complete the funding agreement  before that funding is released to you. And so you do have a follow-up book with Shana,  I believe, or Shana, your service navigator. So she's going to be able to support you through  that answering any questions. So my role today is specifically to help you with the determination  of needs process. Okay. Okay. So again, just a little bit of housekeeping here. Oh, I see Jeanette here. So I'm just going to wait one second just so I can review this and  then I'll let her in. Okay. So I just want to share that all the information that you're sharing with  me today is strictly confidential. So it's only used to create that determination of needs profile  that is shared with the ministry. So we can determine basically Nathan's Ontario Autism  Program funding allocation. I do have a duty to report. So please know I'm not actively looking for any child welfare concerns. However, if I feel there are concerns I have a  duty to report and to document them. Given that everything is happening virtually, I'm wearing  headphones, I'm in a private room so no one else can hear to maintain your privacy and  confidentiality for today. I am working from two screens so you're going to see that my eyes are  shifting. I try to type fast so I apologize for any awkward silences while I'm typing. I'm just trying to capture all the examples and all the  information that you're sharing with me today. If we lose connection, you're just going to close  the browser link and try to join the link again. If that doesn't work, I'll call you via the phone  and if that doesn't work, then I'll send you a message in the portal. But knock on wood, we've  been all good so I don't think we're're gonna have any technological problems now. Okay, perfect  So I'm just gonna quickly add a geneticist name here  so okay and et de C H I H H I H and she is the  supervisor the  What's her title? Um?  I don't think our title might have changed recently but she's Nathan's um program supervisor  that's all we need to know you can confirm with her her titles if you need it yeah no all good  okay program super oops advisor  okay excellent so I will oops here we go and so we'll add her here hello good morning hi hi how are you good how are you good my name is allison so i'm the determination of needs care coordinator so i'm going to be supporting kathy  today through the determination of needs she let me know that you'd be coming today so i apologize  for waiting i just had to go through some uh some of the uh little little um things to kind of go  over housekeeping um and so we've kind of confirmed all the information.  So you'll be joining us for the hour, correct?  Yeah.  Okay, perfect.  Go over some of the domains that I can better answer  versus like obviously the daily living skills,  like mom would be better to answer that.  So yeah, so keeping bearing that in mind,  we'll make sure to start with the areas  that you feel like you can have some nice input  and share some information. We'll start there to start with the areas that you feel like you can have some nice input and share some information we'll start there first kathy if that's okay um and then  um what i'll do is after that we've kind of completed that part i'll bid you a do and then  i'll kind of continue the rest of the stuff with that with kathy does that work yep okay perfect  so just a kind of quick review about the determination of needs process so really it's  intended to be a conversation so i don't necessarily need formal reports and things like that. But I just want to get a sense of where  the level of support that you're providing for Nathan, I want to think not necessarily his best  day, or his worst day, but that typical what it's looking like right now. And we reflect on the last  30 days. Now, with that being said, with the last 30 days to get a current snapshot, I always like  to let families know if there's something beyond the 30 days that you feel like it's really important. Like let's say something happened because like  we're already near the end of July, but let's say something happened maybe two months before school  ended and it was really, you know, something as it results to safety or something to do with mental  health, things like that. If that's important for you to share with me, please share with me and let  me know, okay? I want to make sure that I hear all of your concerns and I especially want to capture  all of the supports and the ways that you are supporting um and you know strategies  and things like that that you're using to support nathan okay so the conversation today is wholly  intended to basically determine his funding for the next year so lots of examples are really  helpful for me with that being said if i feel like i have enough information i'll be sure to let you  know so we can move on to the next domain since there's quite a bit to cover. Okay. Do you have any questions about anything  before we begin? Nope. Nope. All good. This is your third time around Kathy. So this is like,  let's do it. All right. I love it. I love it. All right. Now, um, so what I'll, I'll, I'll direct  this to you, Jeanette, um, just, just based on, you know, you sharing your information, um, where  would you like to start at  communication first and then kind of work our way down or are there specific areas that you'd like  to share other than that? I think communication we can start off, that's good. Okay perfect,  so let's start off with expressive communication. So how is Nathan communicating, verbal, non-verbal,  using a device, what does that look like? He is verbal. Okay. I would say that he more his verbal communication is more  about expressing his like wants and needs versus his emotions okay so he's  really good at like asking for like if he's hungry or if he's thirsty or  something like that but if it's uh you know  more about like tell me about your day like what did you do today at school it's like very very  um like brief like one or two word answers or it's like I don't know or something like that  um or if it's uh if he's feeling um anxious or something you won't be able to express um why  he's feeling that way okay okay so um basically giving you very short responses and so you need  to prompt him to elaborate and expand more on his thoughts and feelings yes um and even with like recall, like let's say he did a day camp a couple of weeks ago,  where each day they went kind of like on a different field trip. He would need lots of  like prompting, like, because he'll just be like, I don't know, I don't know,  this is kind of like his de facto answer. Maybe it's a teenager thing.  And so then I'll have to be like okay remember like in the  morning like daddy dropped you off and then the first place you went to was and then i kind of  like try to get him to like close his eyes visualize like it requires prompting to get  more um info yeah okay or like pictures maybe like if someone took pictures I'll go through the pictures I'm like  okay so when did you tell me about that do you find so in terms of feelings it's not something  that he readily will talk about you have to be like how are you feeling why are you feeling that  way or sometimes he will be like I'm mad like mad it's like the the the one emotion that he can like identify easier I'm like why are you mad but then  yeah the why are you mad will take a lot more um why yeah and sometimes he's like I don't know and  then I'll have to be like is it because of this is it because of this and then he'll be like yeah  but sometimes it's unreliable because I'm like, is it? Yeah. Do you feel like sometimes like you might make a suggestion and it might not actually  be true, but because you've made the suggestion, he might jump in like attach himself to it?  Maybe because that's why sometimes that's why I kind of say it's unreliable because  even if I ask him what happened at school, he might give me something.  But if I haven't heard about it through like a teacher teacher or something i can't confirm if that actually did happen um and i'm like maybe he just said yeah because he wanted  me to stop asking him questions yeah right and this absolutely that could absolutely be a factor  so you mentioned that it's unreliable okay um and we're not necessarily sure if that's truly how  he's feeling or what actually happened so you have have to kind of be a little detective in that sense, where you might have to, like, again, with the poking and the questions and like, okay, but like, okay, what about this?  The visual cues even.  So it's quite a bit of support that you're having to provide him.  He's able to speak in sentences, correct?  Yes.  Okay.  Are their sentences nice and long?  Are they complex?  I wouldn't say that they're complex.  Okay. and long are they complex I wouldn't say that they're complex okay yeah like what mom mentioned right like it's just to get his needs across right like okay  where's the iPod where's the charger I want the iPod I want the charger like  it won't be like again complex yeah so really when's asking questions, it's really kind of to seek  information that he wants and needs.  He's not doing it for the benefit of actually having the information.  It's to meet his wants and needs.  Is it, is it like that?  Okay.  Okay.  Yeah.  And I almost feel like a lot of his responses are very rote, like the  same kind of sentence he's always used.  He's not like elaborating or sometimes it's  not like the way that he's phrasing it is not correct but i just know what he means  so okay okay so some like i'll give an example like when we're eating dinner he'll be like um  am i almost done uh but he means it like he's starting to get full ah okay okay let me make  sure to capture that because that that involves a little bit of deciphering yeah right like you  know that because you're his mom right but if he was at school and he asked that maybe of a teacher  they might be like i i don't know are are you like you know  what I mean so okay so sometimes he like misphrases questions or misphrases comments  yeah yeah okay um and a new a new one that I've noticed this summer is like he'll like I don't  know maybe his sister's bothering him and he'll he'll be like let me let me let me alone or  something like that and i'm like you mean like let me be leave easily he's comboing the two yeah  he'll be like let me alone and she's like kind of trying to poke at him and stuff  okay so it's almost like a leave me alone and a let me be combo yeah yeah you know what he means but you know yes yes correct okay  okay how often is that happening oh like daily this is happening daily do you find that it's  easy like he's easily understood by others so what i'll do like what i'll do throughout just  for the two of you what i'll do throughout the conversation is I like to quantify things. So if you say it happens like maybe once a week,  or maybe 80% of the time, 50% of the time that just so that we're on the same level of how,  how often you have to support him. So if he's doing this multiple times in a day,  you know, that might be tricky for people outside of the family or those who are familiar with him  to understand. So, you know, in terms of terms of generally speaking easily understood you feel like he's easily understood maybe 75 percent of the time  more or less what do you think yeah maybe like 70 percent of the time maybe 70 percent of the time  well because it like you know so then we know that 30 percent of the time is going to be a cause of  frustration and it's going to be a cause of you guys coming in to support and help them right because the other thing  is is that should I can attest to this Nathan just likes to be done he does  everything really quickly because he just wants it so we've started get in  certain situations getting him to like order something at the store like at a restaurant  um whether it's like tim hortons or something like if there's like an opportunity that we're like at  a counter i can order the thing that he wants because he really wants that thing so then i  figure he'll for sure do it yeah he'll speak very quickly or he'll like be quickly and maybe the  volume isn't there even though he can have good volume it's just like can i have a chocolate chip cookie please like like and then  it's kind of mumbly it's fast and so a lot of times the the person you know at the counter  might be like oh i'm sorry could you say that again and then like i'll kind of stand beside  him like okay say it louder slower like slow down say it louder so they can hear you and then like I'll kind of stand beside him like okay say it louder slower like slow down say it  louder so they can hear you and then he'll say it again and then it'll be fine and they'll understand  it okay okay how often is that happening when you're like specifically out in the community  and things like that uh when we're out in the community or when I get him to order um well I  guess I would argue even say like generally speaking how often are you reminding him to like slow it down oh uh pretty much like all the time this is all the time because that's an aspect of  speech we we look at right um not necessarily articulation and stuttering are you seeing any  do you have any concerns in that area no okay so and what about articulation any concerns in that  area no okay okay good so um i mean so he's not stuttering and  there's no concern he's saying the words clearly but he's speaking fast and he's saying it quiet  so you have to remind him often to be like slow it down and speak up okay and I guess the next  step for me would be like just let him do it and don't say anything at all and have him like if the  person's like oh I'm sorry can you say that again like see what he does yeah like okay buddy that's you that's she's talking to you at this  point okay okay all right just to get a sense um do you find it's okay we talked about the speed  we've talked about the volume and so you're reminding him quite often with this i just  wanna make sure i'm capturing that so um you do you find then let me capture here so easily understood so yeah this  is so that's where that piece kind of falls into that so when we also look at communication we're  looking at we talked about a little bit about um his vocabulary and grammar where do you feel  do you feel like that's is that coming along is it starting to be a little bit more complex or  not necessarily the case um i think it's coming along a bit like he's been doing  more speech and language sessions. Well like it's been a little bit more  consistent over the last year so he'll go twice a week  and his SLP will talk to him about like different topics like even like  environment things or you know I don't think they really talked about politics, but so he's introduced to some more  terms and yes, you know, so like we got so they were talking about like, you know, pollution  or something. So they're talking about what would be like something they look at a picture,  why would this be like, you know, more pollution versus like an electric car so they'll talk about things so i think that's helped some of his  vocabulary like i haven't seen it really like applied in conversation um do you feel like it's  not necessarily age appropriate just yet oh no definitely not okay what about his grammar  proper past tense pronouns  Jeanette anything that you've observed he doesn't really comment on like other  people and stuff so personally I haven't seen him like oh he is running fast like  I haven't seen him but I I believe he has an understanding of pronouns like  he's okay able to yeah and what  about so then what about like past tense and future tense using the appropriate yeah he can  do that he can do that okay so grammar is okay okay perfect when we're talking about you know  the teenage years we talk about slang is he using any slang. He doesn't understand it either.  And he doesn't understand.  Okay.  Do you find he's very literal?  Yeah.  If I was like, it's raining cats and dogs, he'd be like, where?  Okay. So he's very literal.  So he doesn't understand metaphors.  He would need support in that.  So if I told him, Nathan, don't even worry about this test.  It's going to be a piece of cake.  Is he going to think there's cake in the fridge?  Or is he going to think that the test is easy?  He wouldn't understand that. He'd be what cake yeah okay yeah okay so he would need support in that that non-literal  language uh of metaphors would be kind of beyond him okay yeah yeah because i don't even think  we've ever really like talked about stuff like that yeah it's it is something that we're working  on with them right now okay um like online like  that's like a that's the group that stuff yeah i'm just trying to see what was the last thing that we  but yeah i know like he he doesn't um he doesn't that's something that would kind of go over his  head to a certain degree that he necessarily okay are there any unusual aspects about his speech  uh so we're looking at like like echolalia, scripting.  Yeah, I would say he definitely does scripting.  Yeah, he's scripting like his videos and stuff.  Okay, so engages in scripting from videos?  Yeah.  How often is that happening?  Oh, like daily.  For how long? Is this something like, like what, how much of is when you're having a  you know you know instead of time how often is he commenting on it is it  something like 50% of the time like he's crying I wouldn't say that he  necessarily scripts to give answers back to people not that I can recall but he's  script I would say he scripts daily to himself. Okay, so that's self kind of self talk in a sense.  Yeah, so my example would be like, I'm driving him to something. So it's like, maybe  two of us in the car. He's sitting in the passenger seat, and he's just talking to himself,  but he's like scripting stuff. And then I'll kind of try to interrupt him and be like,  Oh, what's that from or something? And then I'm just talking to myself. Because like, I think in the past, I've said, Oh, what was that? And then he's I'm just talking to myself because like I think in the  past I've said oh what was that and then he's like what uh he'd be like oh nothing and then  I'll say oh were you talking to yourself and he's like yeah so then because I've asked him that in  the past that I'm like oh he's like I'm just talking to myself um but I don't think he does  that at school I don't know if he does that at the center.  Does he do that, Jeanette?  Yeah.  I feel like sometimes at the center, I find him like he'll do that to himself, but it won't be like loud.  Yeah.  I can see that he's like bubbling to himself.  I feel like when he was quite a bit younger, I think they did do an assessment or a test of something like that at the center and it was like determined it was just like a self-stim  yes oh no 100 i just want to get a sense of how much of it of his expressive language does it take  because if he's if someone like if he was walking somewhere you know and let's say he was in a  library and he was looking at a book or let's say he was in a library and he was  looking at a book or something like that and someone came beside him and he started to engage  in that that's going to affect the his communication with that other person in social interaction  they're going to be like are you are you talking to me what are you talking about is it something  within context out of context right so i want to get a sense of of how often it's happening in that  respect yeah um I don't know  in terms of like around other people I would only know in terms of like in the home environment and  so he does do it in the home environment I'd say daily um happens daily at home okay but I know that  he went to this camp like a day camp um he did the same one every summer um and the counselor last year i didn't ask her about it this  year she mentioned that he seemed to know when it was okay to do it and when it was not okay to do  it okay and yeah definitely yeah the fact that even you're saying that it only like i know it  happens at home and it's sometimes at the center to me hates that he's like this is a this is an  okay space to do it and a not  okay just like so do you get that yeah because she said that he would again do it on the car ride  when they're riding somewhere but then like for example when they were on the ferry to center  island there was another like part of the camp and he was doing some kind of stim and nathan was like  no no no like you like kind of trying to like correct oh really  okay but she was like i think he knows like when it's okay when it's not because i think so too  his behavior was different on the ferry versus like the private car ride down yes pointing out  to the other boy like oh we shouldn't do that or something like yes yes no i definitely get the  sense so then let me ask you this do you find that he is rule governed does he like rule structure  it's yes or no binary one or you know zero kind of deal yeah okay so i wonder if that that part of  that rule governance is that he knows at home or during these specific moments  i can versus i can't okay um okay all right so in terms of so jeanette this is not something that  you're seeing all the time this is sometimes yeah i would say like um he'll do it sometimes  because most of the time when he's watching like videos and stuff i find he's very engaged in the video so he's not really doing it um again i think it's just more so when he doesn't  he he's um i'll say he's bored but yeah he doesn't have an activity to engage in so he's like yeah  yeah yeah which is why i think the car ride thing because he's not looking like he's looking out the  window yeah he's just kind of like  okay it's almost like it's something to do yeah i think so okay okay do you uh do you find he ever  does it when he's anxious or like nervous or is it specifically more so in those times of  boredom let's just call it for just you know in that in that sense. I think it's more in boredom. Yeah. Okay. Okay.  And so it's happening more so at home.  So it's not necessarily happening when he's having social interactions with  others and he's able to make that distinction, which is, you know,  I can see him saying like that, that's out of context within context,  appropriate.  Is he ever talking about certain subjects and it's hard to  switch or change topics in a conversation is he able to have a conversation with people and kind  of follow the flow conversations are hard for him okay yeah because you said there's some they're  short responses right yeah do you have anything to add jeanette um sorry in terms of conversations with others right  yeah yeah so when we're looking at when he has a conversation is he able to follow the flow  is he able to um you know conversations are intended that like I say oh I you know I went  to the beach yesterday yeah maybe ask that person a question about that if the conversation is not  seeking out answers that he wants he's gonna he knows almost what to do just to get it over and  done with right so like when we're practicing and it's like okay nathan let's go practice talking  to your friend he has you know questions that he knows to ask um but again sometimes he'll just uh  say cool thanks or some sort of generic answer and be like, okay, I'm done.  Let me go back to doing whatever I need to do.  Like you said, the sense of he just wants to get it done.  Exactly.  So he won't really go out and sustain conversations or initiate any conversations.  Again, he'll ask us questions to get an answer for himself yeah but it will never be  like what are you doing this weekend or you know yeah do you like this or you know you sounded up  perfectly that he knows the questions to ask but he needs support so we know that he needs  support when it comes to sustaining a conversation and initiating a conversation yeah do you find  that he naturally is a social guy does he like  to be social and to talk with people  or this is something where you have to get a little bit of  unless it's motivating 












yes but otherwise he's kind of content to do his thing um i think social looks  different for him than like how it might look for other kids or his peers yeah so I definitely would say that he's social he likes to  be around people but it's not because he's like playing with them or talking  to them he likes being in the area where social activity is happening but do his  own thing yeah like he'll be around people but not with yeah okay I got you yeah if you're going to  somebody's house he wants to go to that person's house but is is it because he's going to be like  connecting there like socially no but he wants to like be in that other space and like just be  around the people okay okay yeah he likes having people like being in a room with others but kind of doing whatever he likes to do yeah um and then i'd even say socially sometimes i don't know that like the social  interaction i wouldn't call it inappropriate but it's just not typical so he like he goes  regularly to youth group at our church and there are a couple of and usually girls there are a couple  of girls that are like really nice to him um you know like maybe they'll try to talk to him or  something right um i can always tell who the people are that he uh that he likes or wants to  be around because if he sees them at a distance oh he'll like kind of like go up to them and like  kind of peer closer like not super super close but like he'll kind of like lean in and he'll like kind of like go up to them and like kind of peer closer like not super super close but  like he'll kind of like lean in and he'll be like you know like kind of thing like to get their  attention and then they'll be like oh hey nathan and then he's like and then he'll like run off  like he wants like he'll want to make like that yeah connect eye contact and like, like say hi. And then he'll like scatter away.  I love that. I love that.  Which is like obviously not like, you know, age appropriate. Yes. Yes. Yes. So he needs a little bit of support with the nuances of,  of the, of the, of how to have the interaction.  So I always say that whenever, whenever you're having a conversations,  the language piece is really only 50% of it. of how to have the interaction. So I always say that whenever you're having a conversation,  the language piece is really only 50% of it.  It's how you position your body, your tone,  how you're delivering the message, the questions back and forth.  That's really the nuances of it, right?  And so that's the piece that we know that he needs support with.  Okay, so we're going to talk more shortly about the nonverbal and the social pragmatic, so we'll kind of get into more details there.  Okay, so we've talked a get into more details there um okay so we've  talked a little bit about the conversation piece and we've looked at um certain sentences and the  complexity of language does he ever talk about the future you know he's getting older is he  thinking about getting his driver's license is he thinking about you know being older and and you  know graduating is he talking about the future no okay um well he talks about the future in the way that  um if we're going on a vacation he's definitely talking about that so okay okay that kind of  future i guess yes not necessarily his personal future of what he's going to do in terms of  careers or goals no no okay okay okay can you let me know what supports that you are providing him? And then, Janette,  maybe you can expand a little bit more on this as well, in terms of his expressive language.  I know in terms of the speech, they're helping him with vocabulary. Outside of that, can you  tell me ways that you are directing him or redirecting him in any way? In terms of expressive,  it's like what to do when he's upset.  What are  certain things you can tell  us when you're upset or  things you can tell other people.  In terms of  expressive, we're working on  that with him.  I'm trying to think.  I'll capture that also in self-regulation  as well.  Yeah. I'll try to think. And I'll capture that also in self-regulation as well.  Yeah.  And then I imagine at home, Cathy, you're talking, you might be like modeling language and rephrasing certain sentences when he says them to you, like the let me alone.  Yeah.  You know, things like that.  All right, okay, I've captured that. So then let's move on to our receptive language, his understanding of language. Do you feel like when you speak with Nathan, you can talk to them as if you're talking to me? Or is there a need to modify things using simpler language, shorter, concise phrases, things like that? I think I pretty much just speak as I do with others. Okay, good. And if he doesn't understand  something, like he might ask or he or he might, like he likes to ask why a lot. So like, he might  ask why and then I'll kind of like elaborate that way. So maybe I'll try to simplify it if he  is asking for clarification. Okay. If it's something like in terms of like instructions, it kind of has to be  like a one step, two step instruction in terms of like conversation. And I always have to make sure  he I've made eye contact with him. So he knows. So I also know that he's listening to me. So I'm  like, Nathan, can you go, you know, get your backpack and put your water bottle in it? Right?  I have to like make sure I've we've made eye contact and he's listening and  after then i can give him some more steps if needed but i can't be like nathan you know um  get ready for home get all your things it has to be you need to so that's where he needs that  explicit instruction yeah okay i know that you're paying attention to me i need to get your water  and put it in your backpack and so you know that he's understood that is he able to answer questions  basic on the questions yeah basic wh questions basic questions okay yeah you find like if it becomes a little bit more wordy or complex he has a harder time understanding  yeah like the why he doesn't really understand i. Okay. Because he'll end up asking me why.  Like, if I ask him a why question, I feel like he's going to ask me back a why question.  Yeah.  Or, like, sometimes he'll say why, but, and I'll say to him, I've already told you why  when I told you what we were doing.  So it's like, he just says why.  But I don't know if he's actually listening to what I said in the first place, because  if he were, he would need to ask why.  Yeah, so he might need further explanation,  whether that be either repetition  or further simplifying it.  Yeah.  Okay, or further simplify.  Yeah, but other WH questions, like Nathan,  like who's picking you up today or when are you going home?  Like he's able to understand.  He's able to do that, okay.  All to understand, like answer those type of things okay okay perfect um when we look at receptive language we also like  regular routines so regular routines throughout his day he's getting older now what level of  independence does he have to go you know getting ready in the morning to coming home dinner bedtime  what level of support how often are you having to go in there and help him for those kinds of activities?  I would say his morning routine, he is like independent.  Like he'll, we do, we have like really simple breakfast foods that he likes, but don't require  any or just a little bit of prep.  Like, so when I say a little bit of prep i'll sit  me and like put it in a toaster oven yes and toast it like that's a level um so that he can do  independently he gets himself dressed i mean how how well coordinated is his outfit i kind of just  whatever yeah yeah it's not it's not the runway it's all good like he doesn't wear it backwards or inside out but  sometimes the color isn't necessarily like whatever fashion choices aren't necessarily on  point okay um and that's what his younger sister would definitely say um and i'd say like getting  his stuff ready for school he knows the things that he needs and if i've told him for example um like oh i'll be  picking up your sister after school today and daddy's not home so you have to take a house key  then he'll remember that he needs to grab the key excellent or if i told him the night before that  that was gonna happen then he'd be like oh where's the key like above the neck i'm very okay that's  good because those are part like that's become regular  like he's had to do it more than one time okay um and then or like the night before i'll say you  have a field trip tomorrow so you'll need make sure you have your wallet in your backpack like  you know with his presto card like a debit card so he'll he'll know to like get those things ready  okay so it sounds like you're only really having to give anything maybe a verbal reminder and it sounds like it's not very often  yeah um and then i would say with the with the nighttime routine we are more involved in that  so like either myself or his dad will help him to like wash his face and like brush and floss his  teeth we don't help with that the brushing of teeth in the morning because we help him to like wash his face and like brush and floss his teeth we don't help  that the brushing of teeth in the morning because we want him to do it on his own but  yeah we have one time in the day to make sure it's been done really well at least once during the day  okay okay and that's specifically with toothbrushing but aside from that um how often  would you say that you're helping him you know let's say in an entire day you might  provide him like maybe three four reminders in a day like no it's not like just maybe a little bit  here maybe a reminder oh don't forget this you know do you feel like it that's what it might  look like yeah like i'd say like maybe like okay yeah like five or something like if we're saying  like a variety of things um yeah just throughout the day okay and and Jeanette what does it look like in the session in terms of um when you're talking  to him about the different programs and you're kind of having your discussions or whatever  targets you're working on um what level of support is needed when it comes to his understanding  um so again it's very like the simple like instructions.  Yeah.  So for like a lot of the stuff that we're working on with them is like, you know, social  stuff and some self-help stuff.  So it's like, if it's like, hey, we're going to go practice like talking to our friend  or we're going to practice what to do if you hear the fire alarm ringing, like kind of  like very basic questions or instructions as well too  uh just before i forget i don't know kathy if this is still happening or not but i know you  mentioned one time that like he refuses to take like his cell phone with him to school  uh so it's something that like we're working on with him that like you know for safety reasons uh  if you get lost or something happens to you at school like you can text  mom and to let them know but for some weird reason he like has he ever explained why i know why it's  hard because he doesn't understand for some weird reason he does not want to take his cell phone  with him is he afraid that someone's going to take it i don't think so i'm not sure if it's just he's  not used to having it like he's used to like using one of our phones  like for like you know so he'll get to use our phones when we're at a restaurant he's done eating  but we're still eating so we'll let him use the phone then and it's always us handing it to him  okay and at home when he uses a device he uses an ipad okay I don't know if it's just he hasn't equated that like he's  supposed to have a phone because he's never carried a phone i wonder if it's a little bit of  like i kind of what you're saying you're saying in the sense of like he hasn't made a rule for it yet  like right now the rule is in the sense of his expectations about a cell phone is that mom passes  me the phone and i use it when i'm at a restaurant if i'm waiting or when i'm at home i use a tablet  so i don't have a device at school so what like maybe he hasn't developed that yet do you feel  like is he rigid with certain things like that can he be rigid um i mean i guess he's rigid with  certain things but he's flexible with other things, if that  makes sense. No, absolutely.  For sure.  Like there's certain things that are maybe a little bit, that he might be a little bit  more protective with, or in the sense of like based on motivation.  Or just the phone right now.  Cause like right now the phone is like associated with like work, right?  So we're always teaching him, okay, this is what you could text mom when like, okay.  Yeah, it's also because I have not put any games on that phone yeah literally just utilitarian  so that could be that could be a part of it that could be a part of it okay um i just want to be  really mindful of jeanette's time and make sure i i use it okay i'm here till 12. i i could i could  say till 12. i don't know well i want to make sure that's okay with kathy well either way i'd like  to yeah yeah yeah whatever whatever okay okay okay perfect yeah excellent okay um and so aside from learning looking at receptive  language in terms of like understanding of routines and things like that we also  look at a look at understanding and reading and things like that so is he  able to read okay what's his reading comprehension like?  I'm not entirely sure.  And I forgot to get an update from his SLP.  
But she's been working on like inferencing with him.  Ah, okay.  Perfect.  So even stuff that the story doesn't explicitly say.  Between the lines.  That's what I need to know.  Excellent.  So we know that he needs support in this area. Okay. it's a goal in progress okay perfect yeah um would he be able  to read a paragraph and answer some questions on it that was a little bit hard like mom mentioned  the recall piece okay a really long story and then we go back to those wh questions it's hard for him  to read that's hard okay especially if the story is longer yeah and if it those WH questions, it's hard for him to recall. That's hard, okay. Especially if the story is longer.  Yeah, and if it's like,  even if it's like present in front of him, the paragraph,  he doesn't have the skill yet to like scan the paragraph  to be like, okay, like this is where we talked about the dog  and the question was about the dog.  Like, that's really hard for him.  So you would need to like,  almost like highlight certain sentences in certain areas  to kind of draw him faster to cue him in okay he might be better at  answering the questions when like after he's read the sentence and we ask a  question right away yes that corresponds with it he's able to answer it but if  it's like after reading a whole paragraph he can't okay so time is a  factor and also here if the paragraph is too long. Okay.  It's too long.  Okay.  Um, when we're also looking at this, we're looking at his ability to kind of  get information through various, you know, uh, mediums.  So if he needed to research something, would he be able to go like, look at a book and find the information?  Would he be able to go online and read something to find some information? he be able to do anything like that like research in a sense uh we're  working on that right now with him um again still like okay nathan go to google type yeah type in  goals that you guys are working on type in dog or like okay let's see how fast what does a dog eat  like it's still very like prompt okay and he gets frustrated  very easily too or if the task is too long am i done yet i'm done dog right um again wants to get  the task done very fast he wants to get the task done um okay but still yeah a work in progress  okay so in terms of his receptive language i think it's fair to say that there's a level of support that's absolutely needed, not necessarily for his routines because he's able to do that and he's able to do those quite well.  But in terms of understanding the meanings of things, like you said, making inferences, being able to read and pull information, research, there's quite a bit of support needed in that area.  Would you say almost like more than 75% of the time that you're having to like modify and help things yeah yeah okay i'm getting that sense as well but i  always i'm always going to confirm with you guys um okay so then let's move on uh we've already  talked a little bit of uh about speech in terms of the volume things like that so let's move to  the non-verbal communication this is where we're talking about the nuances is he able to follow hand gestures  uh yeah like basically thumbs up thumbs down if i'm yeah like quiet come over here sit down yeah yeah yeah okay perfect is he able to follow a point yeah yeah and will he ever point to indicate  hmm i feel like sometimes he walks a certain thing walks if i'm like can you go sit on that  chair and he'll like walk there like to be like waiting for my confirmation but he won't like  point from the distance oh you need that chair um so i can i can note that sometimes he's pointing  sometimes he's not always will he ever use does he prefer like a visual descriptor like oh do you mean this chair like he's looking in that sense would he do  that um no i think he'll just kind of like go near a chair that he thinks i'm talking about  or just sit there and wait for like my confirmation if i'm like the chair but on the  other side and then he'll like get up and go there uh but he won't necessarily like point  or okay so sometimes he's sometimes he sometimes he isn't he doesn't really use gestures he doesn't  use like thumbs ups okay oh no i have seen him use thumbs ups a lot yeah at home or something at home  yeah because i'll ask him something and then he'll just be like  like okay i don't even have to talk  i could just do this and look at my point across right um okay at home okay uh facial expressions  he does have a lot of facial expressions but he uses face but he's able to understand  others facial expressions oh i would say yes  okay and he understands them so uh just not circle of safety and people he knows but outside people  um that i'm not 100 sure about because i can't think of any examples yeah yeah maybe think of within the center because i always there's a sun there's a again there's a lot of nuances so  there's like the theory and there's the application. He can see, you know, if he was  watching a video, oh, that person's really mad. But if he was in a social interactions where he  had his Presto card and he was going to go somewhere waiting for a bus, TTC, wherever,  and he saw someone that looked really angry and was irate, and it would probably be a safe decision  to stay away from them. Would he be able to cue into that oh do you know what i mean yeah like that's that's where i want to make sure that he  has that ability because it's great to see family members like oh i've upset mom or sister's angry  with me again but being able to see it with other people is just as important especially  as he's getting older and navigating himself out in the community i think he'd be able to recognize it but i don't know that he would make decisions  yeah tailor his decisions around it because like even at home even if it's not a big facial  reaction he always knows when his sister is upset he doesn't avoid it even though yeah history should show you to let it alone and like not  and not poke the bear so to speak yes yes yes and he'll like why why are you upset i'm not upset and  like that kind of  Yeah, so I could be a sibling thing too because my my my two kids did that this yesterday  He's like Sarah's always grumpy this morning. I'm like and yet  Still talk to her and try to talk to her in the morning. You know, Sarah doesn't like this  So don't feel like he does that with anybody else can is he picking up on those social cues um well okay so this was a this is like old info though because this would have been like a couple  years back when he was in grade eight apparently he used to ask people at school a lot like are  you okay are you okay like when he would notice that they were like upset okay the only reason  i know this is because the valedictorian like said  something nice about every student and she put that part in her speech about nathan  so that's the only reason why i knew he did that  do you i just want to get a sense of that okay so if not necessarily facial expressions  what is his understanding of body language if i stood there with my arms crossed  um i don't i don't think  that i haven't really noticed that i don't know if he knows he would know to read body language  i don't think he would no because i don't think so because like sometimes we're working on like  uh you know someone's busy right or someone yeah someone doesn't care about what you're talking about anymore right I'm  yawning I'm looking away he yes okay he doesn't um pay attention to that no okay oh and you know  what I actually can think of something now in terms of like um other people's moods I don't  think he necessarily like knows to tailor his actions to it because there were like a couple of times um during the school year where like he'd be doing something and would be  upsetting a classmate because maybe they have a sensitivity  about something and he was like being upset and then  that was triggering like a trickle effect happening in the classroom  yes yes and then like this other person like escalated a lot because they were  really annoyed that Nathan  Maybe he was like repeating something over and over again, or I don't I can't remember. Yeah  But the other student got really upset to the point where they had to like remove  The other student because they thought it might like get even more heated and he might like hit him or something like okay  But he wasn't  Yeah, or maybe he just couldn't stop himself from because he was  like getting worked up about something so maybe he couldn't even like even though i mean it's hard to  know because it's not like he would express it but maybe inside he knows like oh i should stop  because he's getting angry but he couldn't like stop himself even though he knows he should but  that was he have a like yeah yes do you feel like  he has a lot of impulsivity yeah whatever he thinks he just says is there like a filter no  filter uh no there's no filter and there's no filter do you find he's ever saying things that  are inappropriate uh commenting on things that you're like you probably shouldn't be talking about that  um i don't know that he would know to do that but i can't think of any example okay um can he be very  um like almost a little a little too honest um no no like i don't think i've necessarily noticed that but like there he  knows that there are certain things socially you shouldn't do like you shouldn't pass gas  like yes yes the dinner table or like not even at the dinner table like when you're at other  people's houses but he doesn't care like that's what that's also the no filter thing he'll just  do it or burp or yeah he won't even try to like hide it and he does it at other people's houses yeah he'll do it at school  he does it doesn't matter where if he needs to ask gas he will do it wherever he is okay  and this is where you're like not socially appropriate doesn't cue that that socially  appropriate so he needs support with understanding that certain behaviors are not socially appropriate doesn't cue that that's socially appropriate so he needs support with understanding that certain behaviors are not socially appropriate yeah okay  is this something that you guys are looking at uh like when you're doing your social kind of  conversations and things like that jeanette um like what like what not to like yeah like what  what's this like appropriate yeah yeah like if you feel like something's in your nose we're not just gonna put your finger there you're gonna get a tissue and say oh and then  find a space where no one's looking and then you might want to blow your nose or you know whatever  you know whatever i mean okay so we are working on more of those like those hidden rules right so  yes okay someone gives you something you don't like you're not going to be like i don't want this  say like thank you and you know smile and nod and then you don't have to eat it or you don not going to be like i don't want this say like thank you and you know smile and nod and then  you don't have to eat it or you don't have to whatever the case may be exactly yeah um one  area we look at aside from body language is we look at tone nathan nathan can he discern the  change in my voice as indicative that change of tone of how i'm feeling i like if I say Nathan I think I want I want to say yes okay yeah  definitely I think whatever I'm like Nathan like with all this is like a more  little more sense of urgency or yeah yeah I try to get his attention he  definitely does pay attention because that's an important piece what else we  also look at is understanding that the facial expression so however we kind of i'm having  the worst day in the world would he understand that like our face might not mess and match the  message no i don't think so or is he going to be very literal again with that i i don't think i've  tried that well it's not so much specifically that of you but i i don't think i've tried that yeah well it's not so much  specifically that if you but because i don't think he understands sarcasm right that's so he's not  he's not he's not going to be able to connect the two where like you're smiling but you just told me  that yeah the worst thing ever yeah yeah okay that match the message so he does he he sarcasm is lost on him yeah I would say  so yeah again he takes everything very literal so it's like mm-hmm okay so then  let's move to our social pragmatic use of language so when we're looking at  that is we're looking at the community the communication skills that he does  have is he able to use it in different places and you know uh because i know that he's aware of  some social expectations so is he able to you know he's able to ask for help  at maybe at home would he ask for help if he was in a library would he ask for help and you know  in the therapy sessions at school does he talk at school like he talks at home he would definitely ask  for help at school okay I don't think he would ask for help in like a strange  situation with people he doesn't know okay but I'm not I can't confirm that  yeah yeah no for sure we just want to you know I consider when  we look at the social use of language like a little bit of like his ability to advocate for  himself to a certain degree yeah I would say he does not have that ability um yeah I mean it's an  older example but like um like the first day of school he didn't know where he was supposed to be because it was a new  school okay and nobody was there to meet him because they didn't know that the taxis were  going to drop off that first day yeah and so he and then the taxi driver didn't know he was supposed  to wait for staff to receive him yeah um and it there just so happened to be another school staff that was outside like  when the tax dropped off so she saw that okay good but that's he's not one of her students and so she  didn't know who he was or where he was supposed to be and she tried and she asked him these questions  and he couldn't answer her okay um yeah and then so they just had to wait until she was done whatever she was  supposed to be doing out in the parking lot for that first day of school and then take him into  the office to figure out where he was supposed to be okay is he able to you know you mentioned a  little bit about the text messaging is he able to send a text message and um like to yourself or to his sister as to his dad um so it's something they're working on at  the center um but when i've told him before in the past like you know those times when there's  going to be like maybe 15 20 minutes where i'm not home yet from getting his sister and dad's  not working from home that day i'll say to him like send me a message when you  get home just saying mom i'm home now but he almost never does it and there was one time  instead of sending me a message he called me and said mom i'm home now and then hung up and didn't  like wait for me to say anything and you're like well at least at least I know, right? Yes. Okay. So he never texts.  And then I'm going to take the example and called and hung up.  He didn't wait for you to answer.  He didn't wait for you to say hi or anything like that.  No, I think he heard me. 
















I was like, oh, hi, Nathan.  And then he was like, hi, I'm home now.  And then he hung up.  Okay.  Okay.  Yeah.  So I want to make sure to capture that when we look at our um in this area we're looking  at learning how to like end conversations on a like okay thanks bye like yeah just to kind of  like to close that so um do you find that that's typical of his phone of how he is on the phone  yeah i think so i don't know that he always says bye. But I know there was another time,  and this is why I asked them to add it into the program at ABA, that he, I made him take the phone  with him, because I knew he was gonna be downtown for a field trip. Yes. Then he called me. But then  I think it only rang a couple of times times and I didn't pick it up in time  and so I tried calling him back he didn't pick up the phone I sent him a text message saying oh  you called me like you know it looks like you called me was that by accident and he just didn't  answer me so then I figured it probably was a butt dial but like I was like Nathan you could  have answered me you could have picked up the phone or when I sent you the message because I could see that he read  it maybe that's very you know developmentally appropriate for the  teenage years yeah yeah okay I want to make sure I'm capturing that is he able  to like greet others is he able to say hi to his people  i know you mentioned to the the one girl with the youth group hello you know he's able to say hi  is he able to to respond to greetings as well yeah yeah i would say so okay good so he's able  to initiate and to respond to greetings would he ever you said that he's typically not going  to start a conversation right no okay if someone going to start a conversation right no if  someone tried to start a conversation with him it's gonna be like maybe three  four exchanges I don't even know if there'd be three or four exchanges it  would depend with the other if the other person was asking him specific questions  okay like it might just be like okay hi hi nathan hi so-and-so how are oh hey nathan how are you  i'm good usually i feel like that's where it end like sometimes he'll like with slp you know she'll  be like oh how was your weekend and then he was like oh it was good and then he started to say  back to her how was your week okay good yes yes yes and so this is something that's just emerging yeah and  then so she'll answer how her weekend was and then unless she asked him something back like the  conversation okay so he's just starting to work on answering and asking questions back okay excellent  when we also look at the social pragmatic we listen uh use of language we look at the ability  to ask questions and share information  and ideas so is there something that he really enjoys that he would talk about  i don't think so okay  all right what does he like to do um i guess watch, like, videos on YouTube or, like, play a video game, like, on his Nintendo Switch.  But he always plays the same game.  It's only one game.  And which game is that?  It's called Animal Crossing.  Yes, yes, yes, yes.  Oh, it's, like, a whole world.  Okay.  And plays Animal Crossing on the Nintendo Switch.  What are some other things that he enjoys to do like after school on weekends, things like that?  He will like going for walks. Or he'll like, he'll want to go to like the library  or like a toy store or something like that.  Okay. Do you find that, do you have to support him specifically and finding something to do  or he's pretty good at no time yeah because after school like if i let it ride he would just be on  the ipad yeah yeah okay and i don't have to tell him to go pick up the ipad he'll just grab it  himself he'll go and he'll just be like i'm doing my thing okay and what kind of videos is  he watching when he's on youtube it's usually videos of like shows that he liked when he was  a kid okay he still likes those same kind of shows and the weird thing is as i was saying to my  husband we used to have a pvr when he was little and so we'd record shows that he liked on from  treehouse yeah sometimes the way that the scheduling, you would get like a blip it.  Yes.  Next show, you'd get like the first two minutes because it just like the way  overlapped a little bit.  Yes.  And then I noticed like last week or two weeks ago, he was like watching videos on YouTube  and he literally found that episode that was like the blip it.  Yeah.  At the tail end.  So it was like the new show. He found the exact end so it was like the new show he found the exact  episode and that exact scene of where it like cut off wow watching that part and i was like  i've heard him watch this in like 10 years but and i'm like you know what jeanette was talking  about the researching thing i'm like how did he even find this episode on YouTube he's resourceful he'd have to like no like he'd have to be like put in the tv  show name and like maybe something to do with like something like like it's a drum part so like I  don't know did he put the name of the show and then like drums I'm like how did he find this  yeah that's actually really interesting because it would it would  involve a little bit of a deep dive like he would have to yeah so i mean so i mean if you want to  like score this on your program like in terms of like generalization of skill like look at his  youtube history because he was able to do that it was just so strange because i could hear it and i  hadn't heard i remember that blip it very well too.  I hadn't heard it in so long that I was like, what?  Yeah.  Like it was the exact scene where it cut off.  And he was able to find it.  Yeah.  Okay, so let's move to.  These are the videos he's watching.  He's watching like kid TV shows.  Yeah, like Sesame Street.  Like, I don't know.  He's playing some game. He still plays it. I don't know. It's like he's just clicking on Cookie Monster. It's like spinning sesame street like i don't know he's playing some game he still plays it i don't know it's like he's just clicking on cookie monster it's like  spinning or something i don't know what it is but okay i would think his interests haven't really  matured he still likes the exact same shows and things that he watched when he was little okay  yeah and the games like he like if you if he, he would just play the exact same apps and games that he played when he was little.  Okay.  So this is a sense of, this is going to be a little bit of a barrier in terms of his social interactions with kids his own age.  Right?  Even if he's interacting with, you know, like, even if they have interests that are, like, slightly younger, this is really, you know, if he's playing Sesame Street games and watching you know treehouse tv things like that um that's gonna it's he's not gonna find a common and shared  interest um and so that's gonna factor in so let's look specifically at the social interactions  because i know this is something that you're working on too right jeanette um so in terms of  our social and emotional reciprocity so first let's talk about his interactions with his sister is it is it a nice you know typical sibling relationship they they fight and fight and then  you know they hug and have ice cream together like is it what kind of relationship is it looking like  yeah yeah i'd say it's probably pretty typical i don't have any siblings so i can't okay how  typical it is but that's what i'm told because yes the other day somebody asked my daughter like  she's like oh like do you like your do you love your brother because like it was someone knew that  she was meeting it was an adult and she was like no and i was like broad's not nice like yes you  love your brother and she was like you just don't get it you don't have siblings like this is just what we say and i was like okay all right  older is she younger she's younger but she acts like she's old she acts like she's full of the sass okay exciting um and so do you find like their interactions uh there are some positive  interactions maybe a little bit of the fighting. Yeah. Okay. So positive and negative interactions.  That's,  it's,  yeah.  And I mean,  it's just her age.  She's like a tween teen.  So like she's moody and everything.  So.  Excellent.  It's not that he's fighting with her.  It's that he does something that triggers her anger.  And then it's just the domino effect.  Okay.  So what is it like his,  his interactions with you and with  his dad um they're like generally positive i guess unless we're like forcing him to do something he  doesn't want to do yeah is he i mean i know he's getting older but is he still um you know  affectionate to a certain degree likes to sit oh yeah talk with you um yeah like i would say so  and um the only thing is like maybe like we get a little bit more pushback when we ask him to do  certain things and then we're like i guess that's appropriate like he's a teenager he's not a  typical teen wouldn't just like happily do all the things we're asking him to do right away.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure.  He'll be like, why?  Yeah, yeah, or like purposefully.  Whereas before he would just do it.  Oh, okay.  Before we tell him to do something, he'd just do it.  Yeah. And now you're getting that pushback.  Yeah, but I mean, on the other hand, you know, this relates to something that you were asking about before about giving instructions um we can now just hand him a basket of clean  clothes like his clean clothes yeah and he will fold and put them away beautiful and he'll do it  right away whereas my daughter will leave it sitting for like i don't know two weeks  um yeah we're gonna get we're gonna get to that section when we look at independent, we move to as we're  shifting towards more independence and our instrumental activities of daily independence.  Like that's definitely an important piece.  I just want to capture a little bit in the social emotional reciprocity.  So what we're looking at is be able to have that back and forth, you know, interaction.  So we know in terms of conversations, the conversations need support.  He needs prompts, you basically prompts are  there to elaborate um and kind of expand on that specific information um he's not explicitly going  to people to start conversation he does not enter it he does not initiate social interactions right  other than the like the other than the little wave and then the dodge right okay excellent so we know does he  have a sense of humor I think so yeah good does he share that with you or is  he kind of laughing to himself will he share it with others no and it's not  even necessarily like he's telling jokes no no no it could be like I want to I  want to show you a funny video on youtube  it could be absolutely like that um not so explicitly um but um but yeah i feel like other  like teachers have told me that they think he has like a good sense of humor oh good and some and  the teachers reported that as well okay good so if. So if they're saying that, I mean,  he's sharing that with them, right? Or like, you know, he will be silly and not just because like,  that's just how he is, but I think he knows he's being silly and he will be doing it to get like  a reaction. Okay, good. That's a part of the social interactions, right? So we want to see  a little bit of that. Do you feel like you need to, like, I know he likes being in people's company.  Do you feel like in a sense of you have to pull him and invite him to engage more with the family or with others?  Probably.  Yeah, I get a sense of that.  Because he'll just want to be in the room but not like interact with anybody  or like do an act like he won't ask somebody to do an activity with him okay but if somebody was like  you know let's say we had family over and some of the kids were there and some of the kids wanted  to play like mario kart and they're like we want to play then he would say yes like if it's a game he wanted to  play um but otherwise like we were at a friend's house on the weekend and even though they were  playing a nintendo game i think it was one he was not familiar with so then he just watched them  play it instead of being like hey can i have a turn yeah yeah he just watched the whole time  okay do you get a sense like uh so i feel like again he likes  to be around people but he's not always engaging himself would you may say maybe like he needs  support around 50 of the time because he's like halfway there in the sense if he's like i'm right  there beside you he just needs to do that other 50 where he says can i have a turn do you feel  like or do you feel like you have to help him even more than that to get him to engage with others  i don't know i feel like it's more than that but  I don't know yeah in the center I know they have more structured yeah what does that look like  social skills with like as a group sorry like would he like go and like play it engage with  other peers yeah I'm just trying to get a sense of his his of of what support you need to provide  him to engage and into interact with  others uh like if it was up to him like he could he would rather be on the ipad like all by himself  by himself uh if we're outside we might have to set up a game and be like okay we're gonna play  tag and then he might like play for a bit yeah he understands like the rules and stuff but if we're just outside and uh like no  rules were said and stuff he'll just kind of like walk around and like again script to himself okay  so i feel like it's definitely more than 50 would you say maybe even 75 80 percent that he needs to  be instructed that he needs to be that he needs support to be like come on over here nathan let's  let's okay okay yeah no i'm okay i just want i just want to make on over here nathan let's let's see okay yeah okay yeah  no okay i just want i just want to make sure okay um so then let's talk about adjusting social  behavior so this is his ability to understand that social you know the the expectations and  rules of different places when you're in a library you've got to talk quietly you can't run so we've  already talked a little bit about like sometimes he'll pass gas and he'll burp depending on doesn't  matter where he is i mean he needs to understand that in certain behaviors  certain behaviors are inappropriate or appropriate and we're teaching him the hidden rules do you  find that you have to prompt him and cue him a lot when you're taking him out to visit family members  or going grocery shopping or the mall the movies anything like that i think yes and no cuz last night I went up in her and I I  I don't know exactly I didn't hear the before part but I just heard my daughter  saying to him Nathan do you know what an indoor voice is he was like no but I  don't know what he said or did that like prompted her to say that I just it caught my attention when she was like what that is  yeah yeah I love their interactions like they're you know like they're just they're too much I love  it um so do you find sometimes he's loud uh yeah I guess so okay yeah I mean if she's probably him  right yeah because we will have to remind him like sometimes we're like oh like you don't do that at a restaurant ah okay um I think it's also like I've paired it with threats before  like if you can't if you're not gonna have good manners if you can't like follow the rules then  we can't come out yeah you know we can't go to the restaurant so then sometimes when I remind  him of like rules like oh and he's like I want to go to restaurants and i'm like yeah so then we've gotta have good manners and um you know have appropriate behavior okay good so  reminders for good man okay do you think that maybe 50 of the time you have to do that uh or  maybe less 



i feel like almost all the time because he almost all the time like I don't know if you  I won't be able to do it in the camera for you to see but he'll like sit like where his  knees are above the table and he doesn't like yes I know what you're saying is he a tall  guy is he tall yeah or like a skinny guy that he can just like crunch himself up into a  wall skinny guy that's why I was like I don't know if i'll be able to do it to show you but like my sister-in-law does that she's like five nine and she's like like vogue thin but she when she  sits it's like her knees can like almost go like right in front of her yeah yes yeah and so she  like she does that at home when she's with a blanket but at a restaurant he's doing that yes  and i said me and the funny thing is like because we're talking about is he a rules guy he is but  then there's certain instances where like i've tried to tell him this is a rule but it's still not  applying because i'll even say nathan i shouldn't be able to see your knees above the table  um or i'll say nathan look around the table can you see anyone else's knees okay yeah um and then  yeah but it's like that's like a constant reminder that's a constant i think because that's his  default sitting mode must be no it really must be yeah so i think like that's how maybe he feels  most comfortable i've kind of tried to talk to the ot about that too yeah he said it could just be  like because it provides pressure against your stomach to a certain degree do you know what i  mean yeah or like maybe it feels more secure yeah yeah well i mean like i might sometimes a good example my kids like to i call it a tummy pillow but they  like to have something pressed against their stomach when they sleep because it makes them  feel cozy right and so when he can sit like that it's like here we go um okay so we in terms of  adjusting social behavior this is an area of need we know that we need to cue him so let's talk  about his interactions with peers so um he's not interacting she's not initiating a game  of tag or Mario Kart or anything like that he will respond so maybe 50% of the  time he's able to do that I don't know I feel like maybe at the center he only  does it because maybe the teacher told him to go like acid and it could be like I'm at the center I need to do this because this is the behavior I do at the center he only does it because maybe the teacher told him to go like ask somebody and it could be like i'm at the center i need to do this because this is the behavior i do at the  center yeah because at home he never asked his sister to do anything but i don't know if it's  also like maybe he's asked her in the past and she said no um yeah what do you think jeanette  uh he he won't go up and ask people to play.  It's always like we're facilitating it, we're always starting it, but he will never go up  and ask.  Okay.  Is he able to play turn-taking games?  Yes.  Okay.  Again, he'll try to get it done very fast, like, I'm done.  Yeah, so he does do a lot of turn- games um it's like with the slp so i don't know about in  terms of with appear though okay what about at the center do you guys ever be like okay everybody  let's play trouble or let's play that throw the burrito game or something like that oh  like he'll he'll play we play like memory we play card games we play gold and stuff he'll play  okay and he he knows to take his turn yeah he'll play okay and he knows to take his  turn yeah he knows yeah okay he also knows to tell the person that it's his turn or their turn  whatever okay um how does he tolerate losing uh if it's a game he doesn't care about he doesn't  care but if it's something he i think he doesn't necessarily understand that there's like one winner because  when we've played mario kart like a four-person mario kart yeah and like he whenever he crosses  the finish line he's like i win or like eighth or something like he'll always be like i won yeah you've been it and i'll be like  that's so funny so he could be coming last but because he crossed the line he's like  i crossed the line i won yeah yeah okay but he's not like so and so you've never seen him  necessarily like be a sore loser you've never seen him get upset i'm not gonna play um and have a kind of a protest when he's playing these games  like it wouldn't be like it wouldn't be a barrier for a social interaction his inability to lose  is what i want i haven't necessarily seen it but i feel like the slp has told me before when they've  played games that he's that he has said something about wanting to win um but i think she kind of was like oh well you know sometimes i win but then sometimes you  win okay kind of look at that i don't know about at the center with like the other like with a  smaller group it doesn't sound like it it sounds like he's it you know and a lot of it it sounds  like because of motivation he's indifferent he's like i'm just doing this because you want to do it i don't i have no  interest in playing this game right there's a there's i think there's a motivation piece that's  involved yeah and the games that he does like like when we used to play games at home like he really  likes chutes and ladders i don't think he really cared like he just like got to the finish and that  was like yeah yeah okay it's almost like  it's a task rather than a source of enjoyment uh yeah or even though he would like playing that  game i don't think he saw it in the context of like you're against the other person it's like  we're all trying to get there ah okay okay collaborative it's a collab it's a collab  mario kart is collaborative we're all trying to? Okay, definitely. So then let's talk about, so we know that he needs full support in terms of his interactions with peers. This is something that, you know, perhaps a lack of motivation, whatever that might be, we know that he needs, you know, like, I mean, that's why you're helping him right it needs to be organized for him because he's also not good like in terms of like  I feel like this could fall under communication he's very reticent to make  any choices Oh like any open-ended choice like what do you want to do today  I don't know can you tell me I'm like no I can't tell you what you want to do  today does he get overwhelmed when there's  too many options no he wants options but he doesn't open-ended so then I think because in  the past then I've given him options so you know even it was like he's very into food and like  what he's going to be eating he's constantly asking like what's for lunch what's for dinner  what do we eat um and the other night I was like okay like let's constantly asking like what's for lunch what's for dinner what do we eat um and  the other night i was like okay like let's go somewhere like you and me where do you what do  you want to have for dinner and he's like he's like oh oh i i i don't know like his de facto  answer again is always like i i can you tell me yeah no i'm like think think about the foods you like to eat yeah this is you like to go and one and  then he's like can you get I think he said something along the lines of can you give me  some options so what I tell me okay yeah can you tell me his way of telling you that so the way  that when I see that to me I interpret that as he gets oh he gets overwhelmed at the it's just like there's too many  he almost needs like a like a forced choice so i give him three a b and c yeah there we go so  if i'm like okay we could go we could have mcdonald's panera or pizza then he'll like  he'll right away it won't even be indecisive about it yeah right will latch on to one okay okay so I'm  gonna say needs support with choice making um he needs uh he needs an outline of choices right  like he needs an outline or almost like a forced choice to a certain degree  um options to choose from and sometimes if he doesn't want something he says he says a sentence that on  its own makes sense but it doesn't make sense because he'd be like I just had that yesterday  and I'm like no you didn't have that yesterday like but it's but he means it like I don't want  that like and so look if he had said that to me I'd be like oh okay you went out for dinner  yesterday I would be right and so this is where you almost are acting like you are deciphering  what he's saying a little bit as a translator so that's why i've made sure to capture that in terms of  that that support because i i would take him literally because what he's saying makes sense  to me like oh okay you went out for lunch yesterday okay but what you're saying is what he  meant was he had that last time when he ate out not that it actually was yesterday okay yeah let's  talk about two-way friendships does he have someone that he can identify as a friend?  Someone in his class that he talks about often might show that he maybe hangs out with them at recess.  They do certain activities together. Anyone at the center that he seems to show a preference for?  He knows, like, if someone's missing from his group.  Okay.  Like, his online group group he'll be like where  is this boy today right he'll know that but he's not but it's more so i don't know if he's taking  attendance like he's not like definitely seeking out like why is that person not here today yeah  because i think yesterday it might have been yesterday i was like oh did you have your online  group and he was like yeah and i like, was it a group or was it  just you and the teacher? And he was like, oh, it was a group. I was like, who was there? And he was  like, Mason. And then I was like, okay. I was like, what about Lucas? Was Lucas there? And then he goes,  Lucas didn't join us today. But I think it's probably because the teacher said, Lucas won't  be joining us today. So like, cause that's not a phrase he would normally say that I'm like,  he's gotta be like verbatim, just repeating what the teacher said.  Where's Lucas?  Cause he's usually there.  It's like, and then that's what she had said.  Okay.  Okay.  Do you think that the lacks of the lack of friendships bother him?  No.  He's indifferent.  Yeah.  Okay.  Cause he never talks about anybody at home. Like have to ask him i'm like tell me then  i'm like oh who's your friend at school he's like i don't know or something and i'm like  or i'll be like tell me the name of somebody in your class yes i'm like that's impossible you  have to know somebody yeah okay okay so then let's move to perspective taking. So this is his ability to put himself in another's shoes to see things from their point of view. Do you think he understands that like looking through the window kind of perspective?  I don't think so.  Does he know the preferences of others?  Would he say, like, if you, I'll give this example.  Okay. Okay, guys, you guys can choose whatever you want to have for dessert.  Nathan, can you go to the fridge and get ice cream for everybody?  Would he know his sister likes chocolate and he likes vanilla or that she doesn't like vanilla?  You know, something like that.  I'm not sure. Ken ken do you think you would know  uh sorry my husband just ended up in the room right now yeah yeah okay  i think if you press that he would but he wouldn't naturally  i don't know if you could hear he said if you pressed nathan he would he might be able to tell you but it's not he would naturally okay what about anticipating the needs of others if you said oh hey i've got  a really bad headache you know i need to lie down quietly for a little bit is he going to be like my  needs come first like okay okay mom and then just kind of go about things dad says 100 his needs  well he'll say something along the line sorry sorry, I was just looking for something.  

No, no, all good, yeah.  If somebody falls in front of him, he'll say, do you need a bandaid?  But then I think that's a bit of a script because he's seen that in a show.  But then he'll just walk off without looking for a bandaid, you know what I mean?  Okay.  Okay, now that's a perfect example.  






That's what one is supposed to say.  Well, this is and so this is where he's pulling these scripts, right?  He knows I'm supposed to say something and he's saying it.  So, but he would notice that someone would be hurt or that they were maybe upset.  I'm going to say that because the example I'm thinking of, somebody sat down and said,  oh, I scraped my knee.  Yeah.  Because they were in a game and he's like, why are you not playing anymore?  And he said, oh, do you need a band-aid?  So that was kind of the script that I was thinking of.  Oh, yeah.  Like whether he would have said that on his own, I'm not sure.  Did the person say they needed a band-aid?  No, they said, oh, I hurt my knee.  And then he said, oh, do you need a band-aid?  And then what did they say? And they said, no, no they said no no it's okay i'm just going to rest here oh  okay and then did he leave it yeah he went off jumping do you find that he showed that he shows  empathy again i think it's script-based i don't know if he truly believes like an empathetic  because okay if he did he would be a bit more engaged to find a resolution.  Yeah, no for sure he would be motivated and concerned about them right?  I mean he's always very concerned when his sister seems to be like upset or mad.  And but that could be the relationship that he has with her right? It's for others outside the social  circle that he might be a little bit more... like that's why i said he's he seems to be very in tune to people's emotions  but maybe he's just very in tune to his sister's emotions absolutely oh for sure yeah for sure i  you know they always say there's like a circle of trust to a certain degree right like these are the  people that are safe that i know that i see on a regular basis and you know as much as he might  poke the bear and she might poke the bear you know like they  fight there's there is a relationship that is built on some level of  understanding and you know and compassion and care right okay just add  on to that like yeah if any of us are like acting frustrated our daughter  especially because she's yeah she's that age right  yeah yeah he'll react and he'll say what's the matter uh because i think he's been taught to  say if somebody's in distress or anything you ask what's the matter right but he has no concept of  what the actual question is and what that response might be even it's like read the room type of  thing right like you know what i mean like yeah that's what he's  being taught but he doesn't realize that she's already answered or she has no interest in  answering that question it's actually going to make it worse so nuance he knows the first step  yes perfect world you ask and and people receive it in a in a nice way but yeah she's like crying  you don't you don't you don't keep on asking over and over again and if she escalates you don't and it goes back to what you said  about the words not matching the face or even the tone because she's like I'm not  mad but he won't leave it alone even though like the tone is like up here  like oh you know I probably don't want to bother that person anymore  because they sound like you're upset even though they say they're not um yeah okay so definitely  again this ties in with that other area so we know that this is gonna tie um he's gonna need a lot of  support with understanding emotions and appropriate responses to emotions right yeah yeah right so if  she says i'm not angry and you're like what she says, I'm not angry, and you're like, what? She needs time and space, buddy, this is where you're gonna, you're gonna walk and you're not going to say, you know, are you okay? Can I get you something? Are you sure? Do you need this? You know, and like, like, don't keep asking questions, right? I'm just, thank you. So the next area I'm gonna, Jeanette, where would you like to go to? we've now completed uh communication and social interaction um is there any other area that you'd like to comment  on specifically looking at self-regulation i feel like maybe that might be beneficial yeah um or  like the cognitive skills yes yes yes sorry let's talk about like the problems yeah okay so tell me  uh let's talk about what's happening in aba um so in terms of like cognitive like executive  functioning cognitive skills like that is a big work in progress for nathan like we mentioned before  like the problem solving skills aren't really there um like planning like activities skills  it's not really uh like we're still working on that as well too um so yeah like those are like a work in progress is he able to manage time like keep track of time  okay we're running late I got it you know things like that yes I think he's a very good timekeeper  I don't know I don't know if he's like that at the center but he always knows when his appointment is  supposed to start and when it's supposed to end and it's like oh we're done now um or um you  know sometimes there'll be like a list of things that they want to cover like let's say he was  doing like his tutor will give him a list like today we're going to work on these five things  when those five things are done he's like we're done or let's say the time was up but the list didn't finish yet he's like oh well we're done at 5 30.  so he's very yeah do you would you say he's organized  to a certain does he lose things often  like Chargers is he so I'll give you an example he loves his tablet is he responsible that when  he finishes with his tablet he puts it in his space and he charges it if he sees that it's  low so for next time okay yes he's very concerned about low battery  but there's a certain amount of planning which which i that i want to recognize like this so  you know it's like i've used the battery at this point i'm going to make sure i charge it overnight so that tomorrow it's set up for me okay yes for sure um uh i  like does it lose like like when he's going to school does he forget things  forgot your hat in the winter time did you remember sunscreen you know things like that  he might and then he doesn't realize it and then when he's asked about it then he gets  very upset if he doesn't have it or he doesn't know where it is because he's left his jacket  behind in the, he gets picked up and dropped off by a cab.  Yeah.  But he's always the same driver.  And he'll, there are times when he'll have left his coat in it on the ride home because  he took his coat off and he didn't want to wear it and then and then the the next day would be like oh  nathan like where's your coat yeah oh oh he's like oh i don't know and then and then we'll be like  did you leave it like at school in the locker did you leave it and again so it's like that kind of  thing and until it's kind of resolved he'll be like quite like agitated  because he doesn't know but it's not like he's keeping track in the moment  of like making sure everything is where it should be yes okay so sometimes so i just like not in the  moment okay okay okay so i feel like in some aspect of things he is, you know, definitely getting  a sense in terms of his executive functioning, you know, like managing time and keeping like  days of the week calendars. Is he good with keeping track of dates and appointments? Like  that part's great. But the planning, problem solving, flexible thinking, we know that he's  going to need support with that.  The calendar he's good with because he knows to look on like like kind of  the the different digital calendars yes sometimes i haven't put it on his but because he's on an  ipad that's connected to my account he can see mine and maybe i didn't tell him about it yet  because he doesn't like certain community appointments and then he'll be like how do  you know that you have the dentist so he's like i said he's resourceful i mean if  he's finding videos from treehouse like you know things like that okay so yeah no go ahead oh i'm  just i i like in certain ways he is organized because he knows what he needs for certain tasks  so last week last week we had to do an online slp session but we had to do it at his grandparents house  so I went and gathered up the stuff that he would need for it yeah and that was like but then I said  okay we're gonna go now and he said where's my laptop or something like that they were like  where's the device that he was gonna connect with and I said oh it's in my brown bag and then he  looked inside my brown bag and I brought the charger I brought this dice that he uses for like some of  the games online and then he and and he's like are my because the teacher he has one in person  one online she always gives him an extra pack of like Welch's gummies that he can have after  the online so he's like are you gummies there I said I put the gummies in the bag he looked in  the bag and then he realized that this like paper like this uh this exercise that  they worked on together in person it was like just paper stapled together he didn't see that in the  bag so then he ran up to his room okay and then thought that and put it in the bag so that's what  i wouldn't have known about and so that that tells me actually two things that tells me that there is  definitely a level of organization and i feel like  motivation is is a key to that does he like is he like completist like he likes things to be complete and done i think if that means complete and done means he's going to get his preferred  activity then absolutely okay um because i feel like you know so for him to go through there and  be like go through almost like a mental him to go through there and be like,  go through almost like a mental checklist to see what he needed. That's really good.  That's managing the time. And it's like, okay, look at the time. Here we go. You know,  I wouldn't have had a list for him to refer to. Like you need this. Yeah, this was purely on him.  Yeah. Okay. So I'm just kind of making note of that because that's a really good strength.  You know, and so I would you is it fair to say that you think for executive functioning that he might need support maybe 50% of the time. So in terms of problem solving, you know, planning, you know, those and maybe keeping organized with some things he's able to do it but i mean knowing what he  needs for an appointment as a checklist keeping track of appointments calendar dates and things  like that he is able to do that do you feel like it might be a 50 50 in that sense he's still  learning in terms of like the calendar and stuff because we're still working with him like inputting  things into his calendar what to do if like and And so you're helping him with that, right?  Yeah. He's, he, like, if I show him like an invitation, like, yeah,  that's what we're doing right now. Like I just go and make like a random like birthday invitation here and put  it into your calendar. He's able to do that, but he can't,  he's still working on like, Oh, I have a dentist appointment at the same time.  What should I do in that case?  Okay. Okay.  So maybe more than 50 50 maybe like 60 70  yeah like maybe 75 based on like if you're helping him that much with the calendar like  I feel like he know the example that mom gave he knows because it's a part of his routine  ah and he's good with routines okay if it was something new and stuff he can't he can't plan  and he can't and that's what  that in that moment flexible problems okay so i'll know maybe even 75 or more okay so talk to me  specifically about his attention and concentration so i like to look at it in two ways there's  preferred activities and then there's non-preferred activities so preferred activity like the ipad how  long would he be able to you know focus and attend for a long time like limitless time yeah okay for like hours  like a whole day yeah okay non-preferred activities what are we what are we looking at  so maybe a board game maybe a worksheet maybe something you know that you're seeing in the uh non-preferred he can stay on task maybe like 20 minutes okay is that with is that with support  or without support uh so that's like we're like doing stuff with him like if i was to give him  like here's a worksheet do it for 20 minutes uh he'll probably like try not to do it or he'll  lose track yeah uh but i do find that like if it's like someone new to do it or he'll lose track.  Yeah.  But I do find that like if it's like someone new to him that like maybe he's  like, oh, this person doesn't really know the rules.  He'll like do something like once and then he'll go and get the iPad.  And it's like, wait, hold on.  We're still like working like concert reminders for that. 



OK, so, yeah, like right now we are working  with him like like 20 ish, 30 ish minutes, but like, it's us as a whole group. Okay, we're gonna go do this now. We're gonna go do this now. He doesn't like right now with him. It's our programming is not really like sit down and alongside him yeah you're staying close by to cue and to prompt  him yeah um in the online sessions though if we're busy like talking to someone else or trying to  explain something to him i can see his eyes are like he's like looking at the back of behind his  uh bed to see what the ipad video is playing or like yeah his eyes are like darting somewhere on  the screen so i know he's like not focused  and he's not like staying on task with the group.  Do you find he's easily distracted?  I would say so, yeah.  Like I have to like ask him  like when he's putting away his iPad in person and online,  I have to ask him to flip it upside down  and to turn it off.  Otherwise he's always like,  oh, what's the video playing now?  Or like what's the battery?  So he does need like a lot of prompts and like reminders to like stay on on task now when he rushes through things do you find he misses  details yeah yeah right i mean naturally if you're just trying to like motor through stuff like you're  just get it done get it done so he'll yeah due to rushing okay yeah so in terms of his attention  and concentration um he doesn't have any other diagnosis aside from autism like you don't have  a diagnosis of adhd or anything like that do you um we did like a psycho educational assessment  at the school board okay like with the school board um it was his grade i want to say it was  his grade seven year it was either grade seven or grade eight say it was his grade seven year. It was either grade seven or grade eight.  So it was like a few years ago.  Yeah.  And there was like a diagnosis of ADHD as well.  Okay.  Okay.  We haven't changed anything.  Okay.  Because all the things that we were doing for like the ASD, those are the same strategies that would help with ADHD.  No, no, for sure.  He doesn't suffer  from any seizure disorders or any genetic disorders right no okay perfect  I will make note that the diagnosis of ADHD as well but we haven't pursued any  medication or well he sounds like he's been able to manage fairly well I think  so I guess unless it would help well like this part i don't know well it depends how much  uh the view that how how the behaviors are being perceived and how much they are a barrier to him  participating


yeah right psychologist when i brought that up with the psychologist and i said  i probably wouldn't be interested in um like just pursuing the medication part she's like oh that's  actually not what i would recommend for like a first, like a first option anyway.  Yeah. Yeah. Okay, perfect. 



Okay. Let's talk about his memory. Because I feel like this is a strength of his. Is that fair to say? You know what, the funny thing is in the testing, though,  like the memory wasn't high, but he does have a good memory. So I think it's just  motivation. What's reinforcing? Yeah, yeah, like what what he's interested in remembering versus not  interested in okay because you know the chats they show you a picture and then like they cover it and  you're supposed to like like he won't recall things there like to like really look at it in detail  um so let's go through the list here is he does he know his phone number and address  uh or your phone number perhaps he knows the address and i think i just learned that he knows my phone  number yeah we're teaching him mom's phone number because like uh again like the cell phone yeah  like what if you didn't have your cell phone because every time like what's mom's number he  goes into like the context and he's like yeah yeah right okay what if you didn't have your phone  right what you know it like same teaching him like mom and dad's phone number but he knows his address um does he know his birthday yeah yes okay and i feel like  he's getting better at actually remembering his age because he used to say something like a lot  younger and we're like he seems he seems to know his age and grade now. Okay, good. Age and grade. Okay, perfect.  Can he recall familiar routes when you're driving places?  Oh, 100%.  Okay, good.  Because if I've gone the wrong way, he will tell me.  He's like, you're supposed to turn right, mom.  What about familiar places and people?  Like, does he recognize them, you mean? Yeah. like you're supposed to turn right mom um what about familiar places and people  um like does he recognize them you mean yeah yeah yeah he does okay does he know the kids in his class um i think he would know them to see them but he wouldn't know like he can't tell me all  their names yeah okay um if we were to talk about like looking at a family picture from  you guys maybe a family trip somewhere would he be able to look at that family  picture and maybe recall a memory and share it yeah maybe maybe like he would  remember where that picture was taken okay good before I forget I don't know if this falls under like the  cognitive skills or like they resilient adaptability piece yeah but it does have  like a hard time sometimes like being flexible when things aren't like going  his way yeah that's what I want that is that's the next section so I want it yeah  please go on yeah so specifically looking at his ability to cope with changes and routines yeah so  that's a little bit tricky for him like okay um i know mom has mentioned in the past like let's say  she was she's told him we're gonna have pizza tomorrow and then something happened and she's  not able to get pizza he will like get stuck on that and be like why  aren't we having pizza you told me you were having pizza that's the rule government coming in like  you said it's this why isn't it happening yeah or i think mom mentioned like one time um basketball  got canceled or something and he's like what do you mean like basketball was supposed to happen  like why why why didn't it happen and then mom will explain oh the teacher is sick that's why  basketball is canceled and then he'll come back again like later why are we doing basketball  so this is where you find that he's almost asking repeatedly to  is you think so what else is he doing aside from asking repeatedly like he'll be upset like he'll  um protest like or like protest wine um the only way that i've figured how to like break him out of it  is to give him something else he likes okay so in the example of basketball because it was canceled  there were a few times during the school year where it got canceled it was like an after  it was like an extracurricular activity yeah he likes going um i think it's also because daddy takes him to mcdonald's for dinner on the way to basketball  100 percent it's not happening the mcdonald's is happening and so it's like this whole chain  of like oh this thing i wanted to do and he he's not articulating that he's not saying i'm upset  not just because of basketball i like going to mcdonald's with daddy yeah so there was one time when I was like basketball's canceled he was getting worked up I was like you  can still go to McDonald's for dinner though and he was like oh okay and then he didn't really talk  about the basketball okay so this is where you're saying in terms of like really expressing himself  like you had to you had to use your you know master skills of deduction to be like is it  really about basketball or is it about the routine and specifically getting the food okay yeah so do  you have to help him like will he always have an emotional response to due to change yes okay  unless you tell him that the change is because of something else that's good unless it's a positive change okay  okay and um this is like you're gonna have to support him through that change 100 of the time whether that be talking to him offering a distraction offering him another positive  activity you're gonna have to help him right yeah okay so like full support is needed to manage uh  his behavior or his reactions yeah and i'm sure it looks a different way at the  center like I don't know if Janette wants to talk about that before she has to go  yeah like there was an instance at school where like there was a  self-regulation issue and I was trying to figure out from the teacher like but  what happened before like yeah the whole ABC thing yeah yeah the anti-sexual like what was the thing what was the  action that caused that behavior um but like she wasn't there it was like an ea so she couldn't  quite tell me yeah she basically penalized him like the consequence was him not being able to  go on this community outing that the class was going to go on but it was like way it was like  at the end of the day and this happened at like near the beginning of the day oh okay i'm trying  to explain to her that that doesn't really connect and we don't know why he's upset and you're like  penalizing him for something that we don't even know why he that happened yeah yeah and were you  able to figure it out no because she couldn't really give me the information she was just like you know he  wasn't um like listening or following instructions so if he's not going to follow instructions and  we can't take him out in the community with us in case he doesn't follow instructions when we're out  in the community yeah so i tried to explain to her like you know that's not an immediate  consequence so that's not yeah that's that's yeah and the plus is because it's really um a threat right and and like and did he actually  not go on the trip yeah he didn't so he was upset about not being able to go on the trip  so it almost compounds and it makes it worse because then absolutely the emotional yeah  that's very confusing for him that's very confusing for him especially if like you said  if you weren't like you had to take the time the patience and the understanding  to help him and to to manage and to sort like almost like tease and dig through things to be  like it's about mcdonald's you want to have mcdonald's with that we can still do that buddy  that's not a problem he's like i'm okay with that now okay we're all good so um or have you seen  anything like that jeanette at the center um sorry can  you repeat your question in terms of like in terms of self-regulation because I want to make sure  that we're capturing information from what you're saying at the center where he's gotten upset about  something and you're gonna have to help him either figure out a solution or manage his feelings  um so what does that look like do you say that he can or he cannot manage his feelings  he'll like whine and he'll protest about it so like an example of like okay nathan like  can you the ipod is not available right now like someone else is going to use it he'll be like but  why why can't i have it when can i have like he'll he'll kind of get like he'll seek out the answers  maybe to like help himself yeah but if it's like i don't have a definite answer then he's going to  like get upset about it and then i'll have to kind of set him up okay but like why don't we go  outside and play instead uh but it almost has to like match the same it does level okay so  when you mention that when he's upset what does that look like is that crying is that screaming  is that yelling is that being aggressive like what does that look like um if he's like really really upset yeah  he does like bang his head on the table okay um he has to be like really frustrated that's a high  level that's that's a high level yeah that's a high level yeah okay uh and then so when he  aside so from banging his head what's happening before that what's leading to that whining occasionally he'll like stomp okay um  or like sometimes he does this thing where he's like and he looks like he wants to bite himself  but he knows he shouldn't so he doesn't bite down but he he's like, you know, when you make that like, I'm like 10 down face,  like, or like, like put his teeth right there, but he won't bite down. Cause he knows he shouldn't.  Yeah. You can do that. Um, okay. So then what I want to do is cause I can capture the other  piece after as I wanted with the last 10 minutes that we have Jeanette for is to address looking  at interfering behavior. So we know interfering behavior is any behaviors  that are acting like a barrier it's preventing him participating from things it's often you know  as a result of from self-regulation you know escalated behaviors so we look at different  areas like self-injurious behavior so um is he he'll will he only pretend almost like make the  face he's about to he's never hurting  himself is he engaging in any self-injurious behavior the head banging thing right yes yes  okay so begging is like uh okay so we'll bang his head on the table yeah okay so what we look at  three different things we're looking at frequency we look at intensity and then we look at duration  so in terms of frequency how often is that happening in the last month how rough does not mean does not  need to be exact just a rough how often a couple times a month couple times a week like i know  imagine it's an intense right i wouldn't even say a couple times a week um it's it's it doesn't happen that frequently. At home it doesn't happen that frequently.  I feel like it's happened at school this year, like maybe a few times, like where it kind  of escalated.  But I think again, like at home, and maybe also at Breakthrough, like at the center.  When you can start to see him escalate,'s like you can de-escalate him if  you catch it early enough or if you know him if you know him as well too right like what mom  mentioned like the EA who someone was new to him like didn't know like you know you don't ask him  more probing questions or you um like you need to know him basically to kind of help him calm down  um so sometimes like trying to help him like yeah it's  worse so you mentioned like you can stop him before it happens so what does that support look  like talking to him asking questions yeah like giving him like like you know prompting him like  look you could tell me you need help or um or like okay nathan let's take a deep breath okay or like  here's the answer right like if it's like a you know a question that's like really hard like look yeah yeah all I wanted you to do was  write your name look you just have to write your name here um yeah I don't I feel like um it's  the head banging is like periods of like extreme frustration and like like it's like a build up  and a lack of knowing what else to do it's like that's how  it kind of manifests itself yeah yeah but if he had someone there who is able to understand probe  prompt support it won't get to that point right because you can you can generally speaking do  you feel like you can get in there and the strategies can be effective yeah i would say yeah for the time but maybe  it depends on the situation right yeah and whining and the protesting happens like almost like  daily or like why why can't i have it what can i have it like that's almost like a daily thing  okay that occurs daily okay yeah i'm just gonna go almost like if mom was like no you can't you know um whatever play nintendo switch today yeah  why i want to yeah okay so um and so so if we're not saying it's not it's not happening a couple  times a week would you say it's maybe happening maybe two or three times in a month  the head banging right yes specifically the head banging yeah again he's around people that know  him majority of the time okay the problem is i don't know at school i feel like they would have  told me if it happened yeah um but he definitely does not do it a couple of times a month at home  yeah yeah okay what about at the center are you like maybe like i would say like it happened like  once in the past like six months online and that was because he just got like so frustrated okay okay again it could have been like  other factors like i don't know okay so then let's look at the last month so really nothing in the  last month at therapy anything at home okay so i can maybe note i'll just note that once  in the last month but i'd say the area where it happened the most this past year if we're  going to look at a school year it was at school okay yeah yeah um and they didn't specifically  share any reports no they're not letting you know no or they'll just be like oh he wasn't listening  or or something and yeah like it's not very detailed um okay and i'm not really that involved at school  to because i know he's older now too right so in terms of the intensity when he's doing it is it  leaving a mark is it breaking the skin does it need first aid or is it just like a whack and  it's like a red mark for two seconds it's gone it's not leaving a mark on him i don't even think  it gives him like a bruise or a goose egg or anything um but he i can't i  don't even remember what it was it might have been last year at home he did it against the wall and  i kind of like laughed when you first asked if it left a mark because i still haven't fixed that  part of the wall yet it's left it left a mark on the wall oh it's like indented into the wall and  then i was like and then so i got mad because I was like oh like now I have to  fix this and then and then so initially yeah it was like in the main area initially every time  he'd walk by it he'd be like because he'd see it and it's right there yeah yeah and then so he  would be asking like when's it getting fixed but since it's been not fixed for so long he doesn't  ask anymore he doesn't ask okay so in terms of intensity he's not leaving a mark there's no goose egg so there's no first aid like you  don't have to give an ice pack to you okay the duration is like it's a few seconds like he's  gonna do it once and then kind of it or is it okay yeah um and and generally speaking this is not  something that's largely on your radar because you're able to use the strategies generally  speaking pretty effectively um and we're able to de-escalate him  from from building up to that point is that fair to say yeah okay again it's harder when it's novel  people right i think that's why the reports at school are kind of like you know not clear  because we don't we don't know then when they don't understand him right then it's like one  support person for like a bunch of kids that go into like the  credit class in the high school yeah so that person the ea might not even have been next to  him at that time so yeah okay is he engaging engaging in any harm directed towards others  pushing hitting scratching no i mean sometimes i'm trying to think about like with a sibling  um like maybe he'll kind of like kick out his leg but not to think about like with a sibling like maybe  he'll kind of like kick out his leg but not to kick her like maybe it was just  in the frustration he kicked out a leg and then she'd be like hey he tried to  kick me or something so just something stuff but he's not like no people I'm  not angry at you I want it like I take my hand and I squeeze and I take nothing.  So there's no, okay, perfect.  





What about destruction of property?  Throwing things.  I'm angry.  No, only the head against my drywall that I still haven't fixed.  And that was a year ago, right?  Yeah, or definitely more than six months ago.  More than six months ago.  Okay.  Has he ever done anything like that before?  So when we look at destruction of property, we look at intentional like that. But we also look like  if he's clumsy and he's like broken things.  He's generally pretty good. Like he doesn't throw  things. And then like he has hit  his head against the wall before or he's flung his like whole  body at the wall before but he's never like caused drywall damage.  Okay.  Except for that one time.  Yeah, yeah.  So I will I will just make note of that.  He will bang his head on the table of paper and has thrown his body against the wall.  Yeah, he'll kind of just like, and then he'll like fall to the ground.  But I almost feel like the fall to the ground is intentional.  It's not because he's flung himself so hard that he couldn't land.  It was like just part of his like.  Yeah, like he's not actually hurting himself.  Okay, I just want to make sure of that.  Do you, have you any concerns at all about wandering, bolting?  Is he a flight risk?  Whenever he's really escalatedated does he ever try to like  leave an area um not anymore okay not anymore anything at the center i think she's on the phone  yeah she's okay all good um she would let you know if there's something in the center so um we can  we can base it off of that okay so then let's move to privacy-related or sexual behavior. So this is Nathan's ability to maintain safe boundaries.  Is he know about, you know, like, this is my body.  I got to close the door when I'm changing.  No one should see my body.  Is he aware of that?  I don't know because he's very, like, he doesn't care.  So at home he doesn't care?  Yeah.  Like, he'll, like, run across from bathroom to his bedroom like naked  okay um and then when he was at an overnight camp last year they said like oh yeah when they'd go  and tell the boys like they all need to change into their swim stuff he wouldn't care to like  cover up he just like drops his shorts and then changes into his swim shorts okay is he ever disrobing in front of  others like when he's angry upset no not if he's angry or upset like i think the disrobing in front  of other people would just be like oh if they've told been told that they need to change and then  so he's going to change but he doesn't care to like for privacy he doesn't care for privacy okay no definitely not do you have concerns about that  um yeah so i didn't send him to the camp this year for a variety of reasons like scheduling  reasons but also because i was concerned about the like him just like disrobing like not in like  protest no no but like just i mean yeah mean, yeah. Like, I mean,  if he's just changing in front of people just because he's not necessarily  caring so much about privacy, it's like, you need to have privacy,  but it doesn't matter if you want it, you need to, we want you.  That's that's maintaining your safe personal boundary.  So he needs support with this one. Okay. Yeah.  Yeah. So I am concerned about it in that sense.  So that's why I was like,  maybe let's wait another year to go back to the camp. Just because the counselor brought it up, not because he was trying to like shame him or anything, but he was like, it was more like, you know, next year when he comes back to camp, he's going to be in the older group, like the oldest camper group. And, and so the way that camp is it's like integrated so yeah so he's with  like neurotypical kids in the cabin right and he just said like with the older boys he's like i  wouldn't want them to like um you know crack a joke comment no for sure we don't we don't want  that's why he brought it to our attention just he's like you know because he's getting older and actually in the older group and so that's just yeah okay and  it's like it's like a safety thing too of course oh my goodness yeah like i've noted that so  immediately when it comes to safety like that's a that's a safety risk right um and so one area we  look at is um looking at determining between public and private behavior? Is he curious about his body?  Is he touching himself? Like, sometimes I've seen him do that, where he'll kind of like  pinch like his private area. Yes, yes. Um, I don't know. I don't know if he I feel like they would  tell me if he did that at school. I don't know now i don't know if he's ever done that at the  center yeah yeah yeah notice him do it i'll i always say like you know that's that's like  private like you don't do that for people okay i have a feeling that he might not just be just  because when we're talking about um like scripting to himself like he doesn't do it in certain areas  but then again with the privacy i think that's something  that i've always been like anxious about because i've heard stories from other teachers where like  they'll talk about like in their community class there was like some boy who was masturbating or  something and i'm like oh dear lord like i hope yeah nothing never gets to that point um so yeah  and so you're you're you're talking to him about what's appropriate and what's inappropriate have you talked to him about that okay okay well i mean we just talked we just say  inappropriate or appropriate like we haven't had like a like a sex ed conversation yeah yeah okay  but you know that you would need support with that yeah right into explaining things yeah okay okay and then one area we look at you know we're getting into  2024 digital world of everything you concerned about like online content um  with him he's always just looking at the same kind of like little kids so really  because he's also not on social media  yeah so i'm not really that worried about it's it's more like youtube if  some like stupid person has like hidden stuff within a show yeah but he always like our rule  in the house is that like devices are in the main areas like not  love it in the bedrooms um so i'm i always can hear what he's watching and i don't i haven't  heard anything aside from like those kid shows um yeah okay good i love that you have that rule  um just because like so does he use youtube or does he use youtube kids regular youtube he's using regular youtube okay have you ever heard have you heard of youtube kids  i have i have yeah but i guess because when he started using my ipad that's not what i had on  there and then i just had like an emergency at the center um sorry what was the question sorry i  yeah i was like i just  kept seeing my phone ringing i'm like something's wrong if someone keeps calling me and i keep like  um we were just looking at the destruction of property if he engages in any throwing things  or anything like that at the center when he's upset no okay and i want like totally privacy  



and then so yeah just quickly he doesn't try to leave the center, right? Not revolting flight risk. Okay, perfect. And so yeah, now we're talking about privacy.




And just like,  you know, appropriate versus inappropriate public versus private behavior. Has he ever tried to  pinch the tip of his penis or anything like that? No, but he'll like maybe like try to like pick a  wedgie or something. And I'll be like, Hey, Nathan, you got to go to the washroom for that. Yeah, okay.  Again, that's the nuances of things, right? If you feel  uncomfortable in your underwear, especially  as he started puberty, has he started to grow  body hair?  He has, right?  For some boys, as they start to grow body hair,  it can be itchy, it can be  uncomfortable and knowing  when to cue of, if you start to feel  uncomfortable don't just put your hands in your pants down there find a spot go to the bathroom  adjust as you need to would he know to do that i feel like it would be the same thing as like  the burping and the passing gas like you have the feeling and so you just do it yeah yeah the rules  yeah so we know that this is an area that he would definitely need support with. Okay.  I know that it's 12 o'clock. Jeanette, you have to leave now. Yes.  Yeah. Sorry. Is there anything else that I can?  No. Honestly, we've just got a few more sections left. We've already talked about the self-regulation and talked about what was more important about the interfering behaviors for me, making sure that  if there were frequencies and things like that, which I have. So yeah, no, we're all good. Thank you so much for joining us today. And for sharing  all the examples and just for supporting, you know, Kathy through all of this. Thank you very  much. Thank you. Sorry about that. I was like, something's going on here.  Have a wonderful day. Take care. Bye. Okay, perfect. So yeah, so I've made sure to capture that.  So anytime it comes with safety, I know that there's full support needed because especially  as he's getting older, being able to determine between the two.  So I've made sure to capture that.  I want to quickly just check in with you and see how you're feeling because it's 12 o'clock.  Do you want to go to the washroom?  You need something to eat?  You want to take a quick 10 minute break?  Anything like that?  I'm okay.  Yeah, you're sure?  I'm having my water bottle sure okay excellent so I'm just  gonna go back to where we kind of left off because I know we jump to behaviors  because I wanted to make sure we captured Jeanette's information so we're  gonna move now to leisure and community participation so we've already talked a  little bit about this in terms of how he's able to occupy his time in terms of  the different activities and it sounds like he's able to do that  we did mention a little bit of the uh how when he's watching videos his interests necessary  haven't necessarily matured to that of his maybe peers um so let's talk about structured  activities and you've mentioned a few things so he participates in a youth group um does he play  basketball yeah so he does a program with the special Olympics. And so it's like, during the school year, they meet once a week. And they just like, they'll do a little bit of drills. And then they'll try to like play a game. Like, yeah, well, who are there? And he really enjoys going. So I do feel like basketball is an interest. But does he know all the rules of the game? not um but he just likes you know like shooting  baskets and um i think he just likes that activity he really likes having stuff to do so when it's  like all this free time and there's like nothing on the calendar like he finds that a little bit  hard like he'll be like what are we doing today where are we going today that's his way of saying  i want to do something yeah whereas his Whereas his sister is totally good with like,  I'm just chilling at home all day, nothing to do kind of thing.  He likes to have this structure in the activity.  Okay.  So outside of the, you know, the basketball and the youth group,  what other activities is he doing?  Classes, karate, coding, anything like that?  No, he doesn't really do any other kind of like structured  activities. It's just, yeah, the basketball youth group. And then like we go to church on Sunday  mornings. So those are like the outside of school or therapy thing. Yeah. I'm looking into a program  at a place in Markham, where it's like a bit of social skills and so I think my  friend told me it meets twice a week and like when they meet for like a half day  on Saturdays they'll also do like a cooking component so they'll make a  meal and they'll eat that as their lunch together oh that's so I'm looking to see  if we can do something like that  with him okay um but uh but yeah like we did try karate before and he seemed to like it when he was  younger but that was something through it was like a like a limited time thing through autism ontario  that they had credit up at a particular place yes and i really was interested in pursuing it but i didn't think  he'd be able to just do karate like with the regular class like i felt like he would need  more support and then i didn't know where i could get that so that's why one thing i wanted to ask  you so when he's participating in the karate when he's doing these types of activities do you have  to stay there or can you know dad drop him off so dad does drop him off at basketball and like just leaves him there  he doesn't perfect um but for like as because they have a lot of volunteers that are working  with them okay um so same with karate like we could leave him there but they were there would  need to be somebody there to kind of help him or at least  kind of model like okay these are this is like he needs some he would need some extra support yeah  like at least until it became more like habitual you know yeah okay okay but he's able to do that  okay so let's talk about community and family outing so you guys are i he likes to be social  he likes to be active in that social respect right um? Like you said, he likes to have outings kind of planned on every weekend.  Yeah, he likes to have something to do.  Okay, okay. He likes to have something to do. So levels of support, what are the things that you have to do to ensure  that he's gonna have a good time,  that he's going to be socially appropriate,  that he has the supports he needs  to not become dysregulated?  I don't think we have to do too much.  So if I use the example of like the library.  Yes.  Like just taking him to our neighborhood library library I just let him wander on his  own like and I say okay stay in the kids area because that's the stuff he likes to look at  yeah then um yeah I can just sit somewhere like within that section and then he just  navigates it himself yeah and then it's more like when I would like to leave  then I go find him and say okay  it's time to go now yeah so when you're going up to different restaurants like do you have to bring  an ipad do you have to bring certain things in order to like I know you give him your phone  yeah so we'll give him our we'll give him one of the phones that has like some of the games that  he likes okay um it's just so that we can eat our meal and yes yeah yeah  again it was sort of like what my husband was saying like oh it's his  needs first kind of thing because when he's done eating he's not thinking like  oh the rest of us are still eating he wants to because he's like I'm done okay  so he wants to leave after eating and yeah but if we give him a device then that'll  hold him there the device to occupy his time okay perfect do you have any safety concerns like  like when he comes out of the car is he aware of parking lots is he looking to see where cars are  where people are um i feel like i always have concerns because i'm like the mom whereas like  my husband has less concerns because he's like the mom whereas like my husband has less concerns  because he's like the more i don't know chill laid-back dad yeah um so i feel like i do give  him reminders because i'm like don't run in the parking lot like because if you run then a car  might not see you when they're backing out so i feel like i always am giving those reminders of like not running okay  and it's like and i'll i'll give the reminder like look before you like step out into the street but  you know what a lot of times i think that he has done it but it's just not like  you because even like for us when we're walking as we're approaching yeah or even as we're  approaching the intersection we've already kind of already checked your peripherals yeah yeah so because even like for us when we're walking as we're approaching yeah or even as we're approaching  the intersection we've already kind of already checked your peripherals yeah yeah so as a mom  i can't help it but to nag and remind of course well did you try the same i'm the safety bear my  husband calls me the safety bear well because there's just certain things you just want to like  you just and you know my daughter will be like i know mommy and you're like i still need to say it because i need to say it to know that you know even if you're getting angry at me  i don't care as long as you know when you do it right okay so then let's move to motor skills uh  so gross motor uh motor coordination and then looking at fine motor skills any concerns with  his ability to walk run and jump not really no, no. Okay, good.  How is he with stairs?  He can go up and down the stairs  with alternating feet.  No concerns with balance?  Doesn't seem like it, no.  Okay, good.  Goes with stairs and balance.  In terms of like,  can he pump his legs on a swing?  I think he can.  Like, I think he knows the motion, but I don't know how effective he is at it and  like and it's been a really long time since he's done that because he's yeah he's a little bit  older now okay uh but in terms of your gross motor like his walking running jumping balance  um his trunk does he slouch a lot uh I feel like he always wants to like lean so last year with some of the funding we got him an  adapted tricycle because he doesn't he can't ride a two-wheeler yeah and so one of the questions was  like there was like two different kinds of backrests there's one that's like just kind of  goes to like short or full like your lumbar and then I was like oh I don't know I think  he would probably be okay with the smaller one but then the the specialist at that equipment  place was saying like oh but you know maybe you do want to get him the full one if you find that he  is kind of leaning a lot like it's not like he can just you know sit nicely for like a prolonged  period of time okay so this is where the he might need some  uh he might uh with the trunk support because that when you're slouching it's your core muscles that  are actually like gauging to like make you stand up okay yeah like i feel like yeah he is always  even at a restaurant it's like yeah to be like this or he wants to lie down okay that's a perfect  example okay uh so then let's talk about the motor coordination. So he uses an adaptive tricycle. Is he able to swim?  Yes.  Okay, perfect. And he can throw, toss and catch a ball. He's playing basketball, right?  Yeah, yeah.  He can throw, catch and can he kick a ball?  His catching is not great, but he can kick a ball. I mean, with how much accuracy is debatable, but you know, okay, okay  When we look at mortar coordination, we're looking at also  Being able to do things with our hands. So pouring juice into a cup would he be able to do that?  Yeah, and put toothpaste on the toothbrush  Yes  More the quantity that sometimes he just says does too much is it a little messy  yeah it can be messy at times okay um when we also or his sister complains that he just uses  a lot so then it uses up really fast and she was just like you don't need that much  i love it um in high school they're learning about different sports, but they're also doing sometimes dance and yoga moves. Can you copy what those moves are?  Not like perfectly. Okay. Like I always say that he  Even though he it's not like he  Like has the inability to do certain like gross motor things. He just acts really floppy  So like like you know he'll he's just really like gangly  because he's also very lean and he had like no muscle yeah you know let's say  it's like okay let's do like downward dog like you'll kind of do but it's just  like he'll kind of doesn't seem really solid yes yes like his efforts because  that they're very intended strong movements yeah so i've been trying to explore like  is there stuff and i've been trying to ask the ot like is there stuff we can do can we do like  ankle weights or like wrist weights so it's kind of have him feel more of like uh like a grounding  like kind of like whole time yeah intentional movements that are controlled yeah okay uh or even to try to like build up some kind of muscle strength because  has like little to no muscle tone you really eh okay like he just like he's just very very  skinny like very gay like very lanky okay and so this is where we you know as he's getting older  you know we'll we'll try to change more like an exercise program just so  that it's something that requires you know like focus and concentration like if you even if you  lift really light dumbbells oh yeah focus and like not intentional controlled movements like your arm  is going up it's not just throwing it around all over the place okay so then let's talk about fine  motor skills um is he able to hold a pencil like what's his writing like his writing has not changed much  it's very messy um but he can hold a pencil okay handwriting is just not like he doesn't  have good penmanship okay um he used to write really big. He can write smaller now. And he can hold like a fork or a spoon, but I feel like he doesn't use it very well.  Like so for eating, he always wants to use his hands, I think because it's faster.  And then like when he uses a fork, it's like he's using it to scoop.  And we're like, no, like stab it into the food.  Poke and beat.  Yeah.  Okay.  Yeah.  And so this is where we're reminding for that.  What about the zippers and buttons?  He's gotten a lot better with that.  Okay.  So he can use them.  Yeah.  Yeah, I would say so.  I mean, most of the pants, I still try to just get him like elastic anyway, just for ease.  Yeah. Yeah. Let me try. Pants are in right now, right?  In the fancy time, it's like all, it's all stretchy band stuff.  Yeah. I mean, I still wear stretchy pants.  But yeah.  What about like, we're working on laces. Sorry.  You're working on laces. I was going to say like twisting opening water bottles.  He can do it. Like if it's not like extremely tight okay uh he can he can open his yeah because  he'll you like he he mostly uses water bottles like this yeah he can twist yeah okay and you  said that he's working he needs help with shoelaces right now yes yeah that's uh that's  one of the things that ot had been working with him on i think maybe he can do it now but again  most of the time with his shoes he just like slide in slide out yeah okay um what about snack  containers and like wrappers granola bars bags of chips is he able to pinch and open them um i don't  know if he does the pinch and open or if he just like kind of like tears it okay um  but he can open the packages so like even like i've seen the slp gives him you know those little  mini welch's gummies from costco and delicious yeah yeah so he opens those like on his own but  i don't think he pinches and opens that one that one is a rip it's not a pinch yeah i think that  one is easier to do it that way yeah so he's easily opening at least two of those a week on his independently excellent excellent um when he's  playing uh he plays video games on this which he can he can navigate using the remote control  yeah okay does he ever is he ever into uh lego um he can build lego He's more interested with playing with the completed product than the building process.  Yeah.  Okay.  So he can build.  But I've gotten him to like do some builds before, like I'll be sitting there with him  because I think if I didn't sit with him, he wouldn't have the focus to continue it.  Yeah.  Because there's a lot of, like he wants to rush through things.  You know that, right? Yeah. And well he wants to rush through things you know that  right and so he would need the help to work on that okay so the next thing we're going to look  at is our activities of daily living so our eating sleeping dressing toileting all of these areas  here so uh he is able to feed himself you know that now you mentioned that he prefers to use his  hands so like does it matter the food item it doesn't matter the food item i've tried  to tell him i'm like that's not a finger food yeah and then sometimes he'll say that or i'll  be like why aren't you using your fork and he's like this is a finger food like even though it  could be like a mix yeah finger foods on a plate yeah um can he drink from a cup? Yes. Okay, so he's able to drink from a cup. Excellent. And he's eating at regular intervals?  Yes.  Okay. Any concerns with the pace of food, the way of how fast he's eating?  No, no.  No concerns with choking or gagging?  No.  Okay, good. Do we have any, let's talk about the variety of foods. Is he able to eat a protein, a carb, a fruit, a vegetable, and some dairy? Like more than 20 food items? Or is he eating less than that? I think or thereabouts like he eats stuff from every food group okay um but it might be the same  thing you know so like he's totally fine with eating broccoli but he might not like he won't  eat like a large variety of vegetables he'll have like maybe like five vegetables that he  eats or something like that okay okay same with the fruits like he  really likes fruits but he likes certain fruits okay okay so he's a picky eater  yeah okay do you have concerns about his weight i know you've mentioned that he's uh you know  slim slim build um am i concerned about his weight, because I don't think he's underweight.  Like he's probably he's probably about five, six now, five, five, six, five, seven.  And he's over 100 pounds. OK. OK.  And honestly, like his dad is like slim.  Mm hmm. So like he's just taking from that.  Yeah. Is he able to identify when he's full  um I think so because that's when he'll use that like am I almost done yes yes um but then like he  I think he has some he has some sort of like OCD tendencies like it's like um you know kind of it's  like a habit right yeah so even with dinner with certain  dinners that he really likes he wants to have three plates of it but like he's like oh i'm  still gonna get like one more like so let's say he's on a second serving yeah he's like oh and  i'm still gonna get one more and then so i've been trying because i think that's just what he's used  to but i've been trying to say to him it's not about how many servings you have you have to ask you have to think about your stomach like  am i still hungry yes because he'll stop when he's full but then he still wants the others like the  other play but uh so we basically every time we give him a serving because my husband knows he's  gonna want like three servings we give him less and less  okay would he tell you when he's hungry um he'll like ask us when we're eating or something okay so that's his way and then during covid was when we kind of like taught him to be a little bit more  independent about his snacks so he'll just go get his own snack like as opposed to telling me he's hungry he'll like go get like some crackers from the cupboard or something yeah okay um and will you will you  know when he's thirsty um yeah because he'll just go and get a drink like he because he's older and  he can get it himself he doesn't ask us anymore he just like yeah as long as you're seeing him  doing that that's that's what we want to make sure right that aspect of there okay and there's anything i i don't know because obviously it's not like he's diagnosed  with ocd but i think a lot of things it's like just habitual you know it's the routine that he  has to do or do you feel like it's compulsive with like there's certain things where it does look  like it's ocd yeah so like i'll tell him like oh you gotta go take a shower and he's like I haven't had my fruit yet so this will be like after dinner yeah so he wants to like have  his fruit so he doesn't have the fruit immediately after dinner he'll have it like an hour or so  after dinner yeah it's like he wants to do things in a certain order so he can't go take the shower  and I'm like well you can always just take the shower first and then come down and get your fruit  but it's like I want to have my fruit first okay um or sometimes we'll be out at somebody's house and  let's say we had like the dinner there was like some kind of a dessert we come home it's time to  get ready for bed he's like i need to have my fruit and we're like no you don't because we had  like a dessert when we were out and then he'll be like okay and then he'll go and he won't insist on  having the fruit yeah um but you are yeah how often are you noticing that  oh the habitual stuff oh it's daily it's daily and will it will it evoke uh an emotional reaction  um not necessarily because like you know if i say take a shower and he's like oh i want to have my  fruit first i'm like fine okay go have your fruit first no but if you said no you can't oh um he might like if you were to interrupt if you tried  to interrupt that routine or that ritual that he's looking to complete would he get really upset  about it um or maybe you haven't come across that yet yeah like it's reasonable because the same  with when we go to a restaurant he always wants or like when we go  somewhere he always wants to go use the washroom and it's like you just used the washroom at home  like it's not possible that you need to go again but like he just wants to do it and then so most  of the time i just kind of let it go yeah and then as soon as he's done dinner like at a restaurant  he'll like want to go wash his hands probably because i've told him to wash his hands after dinner because he's messy yeah yeah and then yeah but then we're going on  a vacation and we're going to be like in a different country yeah so i've said to him  when we go on our trip you you can't just go to the washroom wherever you want because  we don't know we don't and you can't go by yourself because we don't know like what it's  like there we've never been there like like you've never been there yeah we don't know we don't and you can't go by yourself because we don't know like what it's like there we've never been there like like you've never been there yeah we don't know what that  restaurant might be like yeah so i'm trying to prime him for like um just to expect that he  can't necessarily do everything exactly the same that he does it here yeah yeah so when is that  trip happening uh next week oh wow where are you going uh we're going to europe  we're going on a cruise um but like you know when you go to the ports like we have a couple of days  like before and after the boat yeah that we just it's a very very different kind of trip for him  not the cruise part but just like being in this very different culture yeah whereabouts in europe are you going so it starts  in spain and then it ends in italy oh and it's just it's really it's just really different like  he's used to like a beach or like and like the washrooms are going to be different you know like  and it's like you know if he wants to go wash his hands it's like well sometimes it's going to cost  you a euro right yeah like there's there's certain elements um it's not as easy to get to bathrooms they're not in certain places because it's touristy  place so you have to pay for it restaurants you know some restaurants you pay and you pay and you  order your food first and then you sit down and then you eat right um and so again so what i just  want to make sure because i'm going to capture this actually when i look at our ability in terms  so in terms of ability to cope with changes in routines and situations you're already trying to  talk to him and preparing him for these things like that now right yeah yeah because like my  husband and i have been but we haven't been in a very long time and obviously not with the children  yeah so it's like we're trying to remember what it was like back when we went yeah yeah and and just like so i think i'm probably a  little bit more nervous than my husband is about it just because i'm like i just don't know how  he's gonna be with this like new environment it's gonna be hot he doesn't love hot um and it's just  i mean obviously families live in like countries all over the world but I'm like it's not like we can just necessarily find like a toy store like a mastermind for him to like go and just like kill some  diamond you know yeah yeah no for sure you might be able to find a lego store they got those all  over yeah um and then even with like the wandering he's not necessarily a I don't even know if i necessarily classify him as a wanderer anymore  but he does tend to walk a fair bit ahead of me like here at home but i noticed that he only goes  like and it could be a far distance but i noticed that he always kind of turns back  to like make sure like uh like where to see where i am okay um or like if we go to the mall  he'll or like okay um for example if we're at like walmart he wants to go to the toy section  yeah so we'll let him go to the toy section and then we'll continue our shopping within the store  yeah um and then we just say like stay in the toy section and like we'll come and get you when we're  done and he will stay there yeah yeah in general i tried  something with him at chapters where i was like i'm you can stay here if you're going to leave  this area you need to come and tell me but he didn't do that he just stayed in that area no he  went somewhere else within chapters but he didn't tell me and i was like you were supposed to stay  in this like within these few five bookshelves and then you and then you wandered to the other  part where the toys were yeah it's basically within the same section but i was trying to say  like well it was a test like like you tell me yeah you're going yeah yeah we didn't um even when i  was like i'm gonna be sitting here if you're gonna leave that area like let's say the whole kids area  you know like yeah if you're gonna leave that book  area you need to come to me where I'm sitting right here within the kids area to tell me okay  I'm done there I'm gonna go there yeah but we didn't so um and how often how often will that  something like something like that happen I think pretty regularly um and he always walks a fair distance ahead so like even at that day  camp he went to at the pickup spot there's like a parking lot and then there's a park like a  playground yeah like it's visible from the parking lot but it's quite a distance away he'll like  totally go there and it's fine yeah he'll just start going there he's not like like when I'm  talking to the counselor it's not like he'll say to one of us like oh i'm just gonna go to the park yeah he'll just go to the park  and he'll assume that like we saw him go there the part that that is concerning about that is it's  because he's not really engaging in a lot of challenging behaviors and he seems very  rule governed probably very compliant um obedient  in terms of to the teacher following instructions and things like that he could easily be left  behind in an area like could you see them like if they went as a class trip somewhere would he  know to stay with everybody and not wander off and look at some other area um I'm not sure in terms  of the field trip because this past year at school they did go on a number yes  and he was able and he was all good okay they didn't seem to express anything about that and even with the counselor at the day camp a couple weeks ago she said that he was good about kind of  like checking to see that they were there but i don't know if it's just in that instance like  we're just in the parking lot the playground's just right over there he did it's like he doesn't  think to tell me it's kind of like same with when i said send me a text message when you get home  saying i got home like he just doesn't think to do those things yeah and then his counselor um  dropped him off at home two of the days for me yeah yeah and the first day she got out of the car just so that she could see that he got  into the front door and he was like and she told me she was like he was like what are you doing why  are you getting out of the car and she's like i just want to make sure that you got in okay  and then just okay and then the next day the very next day when she went to drop him off  like if he was getting out of the car he was like you don't need to get out of the car and she's like okay take it easy okay all right remember she got out of the car that he's  like you don't need to get out of the car i can go myself and then she's like okay and so she just  sent me a text message saying okay i saw him before he's home now yeah yeah that is so funny he's a funny guy my word i love that um okay so okay so  i have an idea we were talking about yes but like going somewhere else i am preemptively telling him  things like preparing him that's what i have been trying to do because so i said when we go on our  trip we go on our vacation i was like you can't just walk this far ahead of us no you need to stay  beside mommy or beside daddy yeah is he aware of it so proud i don't know if he's really aware of  danger like could he could he make the distinction between a safe and an unsafe place or or people  i i'm not really sure you're not confident in it so. So to me, I'm going to base that on that he would need support in that area.  Just because if a perfect example of how we talked about body language, facial expressions,  change of tone of voice, you're going to a whole other country.  You know, the Italians are very, you know, passionate speaking people.  You know, even when you're in a Spain, you know, you're going to see.  And so being able to read  the other people in the restaurant, the other people in the cruise and people in the street,  if they go up to him and say something and being like, Hey, if they, you know, I'll give you an  example. I remember last time I was in Spain, someone just put a bracelet in my hand and tried  to talk to me. And I was just like, and then he's like, Oh, and I was like, okay, this is really  nice. And he's like, okay, five Euro. And I was like, I, you put this in my hand, you know what  I mean? Um, and so navigating all of that,'s gonna need support yeah those are the things those it's  funny the bracelet scenario was exactly something my husband and i were talking about and here we  kind of i was like if someone just put something on him he's not gonna like know to be like no  thank you or whatever um and so that's what i was trying to say to him because it's also going  to be very crowded yes and here like we don't usually go to places that are like super super  crowded um like maybe the most crowded place like that we go to is we haven't even been recently is  like wonderland or something like that yeah um but even there it's such a big open space that it's  not like crammed tight you know where like you're  kind of trying to maneuver through like a large body of people um so i preemptively tried to be  like you need to stay right beside us yeah 100 100 it's how you phrased it i'm just not confident  so i even bought air tags and i'm putting like an air tag on him yeah I know 100% whatever yeah because the  other like my other fear is that you know he doesn't look like he has a  disability well it's an invisible disability right yeah so then it's like  what if he gets into an inner like because he's not super he's aware of his  surroundings but not really so like let's say there's like people and they're walking they're together but let's say they're walking  like with this distance apart or they're standing having conversation he will absolutely go walk  right in between them if like the door is there yeah walk around them to get to that door he just  will take the most direct path even if it's between a group of people is he how is he with  managing personal space does he understand that does he give people their personal space i would say like so so because like  he's also bumped into people like like let's say they're um walking in like another direction or  whatever he'll like have bumped into them and then i'll be like oh you know you say excuse me or  sorry or something like that but he doesn't think about that i don't even know if he's aware that it happened and then so my fear is always that  people misunderstand that and i don't think he would be you know a certain way yeah and i really  don't know what it's like globally i feel like slowly here in north america it's getting better  in that people are becoming more aware that oh for sure there's  an awareness yeah I'm not so I'm not so sure like internationally how aware you know people are of  like things like autism yes no for sure yeah it's definitely something that I can see that you're  planning and you're thinking about in the sense of like how do i how  do i prepare him like even when you're going through the airport if they if they say okay  you come on over here like being able to be like he needs help he cannot be he cannot be alone he's  considered a vulnerable person you know what i mean yeah so i mean it's gotten better even in  those situations where like when he was little and you know you have to put everything through  the x-ray machine at the airport he used to get really upset because like let's say he'd have like  a security item like let's say like a stuffed animal yeah when he was little little and he'd  want to hold it the whole time it's like well sorry buddy like we have to put it through the  machine right now yeah he would get really upset and was like no no she's gonna go through the  machine so like obviously now at this point he's older that part's gotten better yeah yeah but yeah or even just  you know when you're at customs and they're asking you questions obviously you want to act like not  suspicious but you know you didn't always understand that yeah or maybe he's answering the question but he's answering  it wrong because now that they're older they try they they'll ask the kids yeah and then it's kind  of like how do we explain and like are you going to bring like a document or something to help  identify that because especially when he asks questions he's asking questions in a way where  you're able to understand what he's meaning but other people will not yeah so i think i'm gonna put like it's a really old document but  i think i'm gonna put his diagnosis like from when he was four like that document on my phone  okay um because i know in in some of the places we looked at at europe they you'll get free  admission if you have a disability and they're like bring a disability certificate but i'm like i don't have like a certificate yeah so i'll probably put something like that on my  phone and we also got one of those have you seen those sunflower lanyards no no it was started i  think in the uk and then you can um um you can request one you can get them free at pearson  airport as well but i got it sent in the mail to me and then you just for non-visible disability yes  okay all right I was at Pearson recently and I noticed in their signage they  actually incorporated the sunflower into it now too so like you know how it'll be  like they'll be like a handicap symbol like so that's your customs and there's  different lines for like family yes we need further assistance and I saw a  sunflower too so then I was like oh now they've started building it into more things here  that's awesome yes absolutely bring that bring that bring that for sure okay um I want to continue  on uh looking at the daily living skill so let's talk about sleep what's his sleep like um it's  okay like I mean he'll go and he'll like stay in his room but I have noticed that like? It's okay. Like, I mean, he'll go and he'll, like, stay in his room.  But I have noticed that, like, it oftentimes takes him a really long time to fall asleep.  Okay.  And I'll hear him just, like, talking to himself in his room for, like, sometimes if he's not super tired, it'll be, like, hours.  Like, there was one night I still wasn't asleep yet.  It was, like, past one in the morning. I could could still hear him talking but he didn't come out he's sitting  in his room yeah and he's engaging in that scripting um are you concerned at all about  the amount of sleep he's getting um not really because he doesn't seem overly tired during the  day okay um there have been a couple of times where we've like just get help like given him like  melatonin gummy to like just sort of help her fall asleep if we knew that like you know maybe  he needed to get up earlier the next day or you know there was like a time change that we're  trying to get them back on schedule for it's not something like all the time because he seems to be managing okay yeah okay does he wake up in the  middle of the night um if he does i don't really know about it like because he just keeps to  himself he just keeps to himself okay um how so is it every night that is a hard time falling asleep  is that a daily thing i would say most nights most nights like he's awake for like a while  and it might just be because maybe we're just asking him to go to bed earlier than he needs to  and his body's ready yeah um and we try to get him to go to bed for like let's say 10 or 10 30  so maybe that's just too early um i don't know um but but in terms of him waking up in the middle of the night sometimes  I have noticed him wake up maybe quite quite early like you know let's say it's like six o'clock or  5 30 he doesn't need to wake up yet but he relocates himself from his bedroom to the living  room couch and then he'll like curl up on the couch and put a blanket over himself and then he'll like lie down  there i don't know if he's asleep but he's completely still yeah and maybe fall back asleep  okay does he need anything in particular to help him go back to sleep like any does he have to have  a nightlight does he have to have a night white noise machine things like that no he used to  require more things like white noise machine but we kind  of stopped that and he was fine with it so we've just left it okay um so just really it's just  taking him a long time to fall asleep but otherwise it doesn't seem to impair his functioning like  he's able to kind of go about his day okay let's talk about dressing he's able to dress himself  yep okay and you mentioned that the clothes are on the properly yes okay good um is he able to put on his own shoes yes  okay good and you said there's no shoes we try to avoid laces so that's why it's fine yeah okay um  is he able to choose his own clothing is he picking we said yes and there's no fashion right  yeah uh yeah he picks out his own clothes  himself okay and is it weather appropriate I think for the most part  yes okay no fashion sense or little little little little I will say little  give them the benefit of the doubt here oh sister will be like i think we need to get nathan some new clothes i'm like like yeah i think i should okay  however whether appropriate um he said he's able to use zippers and buttons uh any concerns about  materials any sensitivity not that i've noticed that most of the stuff we  get him as cotton so it's usually soft anyway I've noticed that he tends to  avoid certain kind of items like he doesn't he never chooses to wear hoodies  and it's not like he generally layers either so like it's not like he generally layers either. So like, it's not like he'll like do a t-shirt and then put like a zip up hoodie like on top.  Okay.  Yeah.  Okay.  Okay.  Let's talk about toileting.  Is he able to follow toileting?  Okay, good.  Yeah, he does that independently.  We haven't had to put that for a while.  Okay.  Is he able to wipe himself nicely?  I think so.  There's no marks in his underwear, right?  Not that we've seen.  Then beauty, then beauty. Able to wash his hands nicely?  I don't know how thorough it is, but you know, I've talked about like, I'll be like, well well did you go like between your fingers on top and he'll say yes i don't know how accurate that is like thank you  yeah like i did and i was like are you sure and he's like yes and i'm like okay i love it  can you use public washrooms yes yes okay good we need to have so the only thing with toileting that i'll say yeah like he  um he tends to struggle with like going pee without pulling his pants further down  um so like i mean what back then it used to be all the way down to the ankles now at least it's like maybe like um like mid thigh okay so he's still he's still pulling them down quite low yeah so i'm not sure anymore  because i don't go with him so i don't know um it's something i should ask my husband to like  follow up on but i know for sure i know for sure last year at school there was an incident  last year at school yes okay there was an incident that um he was using the washroom there and he was  wearing like a long sweatshirt so it's not like anything was visible but i guess the the waistband  of his pants must have been kind of like mid-thigh like definitely under his bum okay you couldn't  see his bum but a boy saw him and thought it was funny and took a picture of him oh no and posted it in like this  google classroom thing like within the school in the google classroom oh my goodness it was some  kind of google thing that the high school uses it was like for their grade i think oh goodness  and he posted in there from from what i understand he didn't post it on like some other external site yeah i just like to me i'm just like that that  kid's not very smart like obviously there's teachers monitoring a google classroom well  yeah and you posted it it's clearly under your name yeah yeah that's what i'm saying like how  clever is this kid but okay so they posted it and then what happened so the thing is nathan okay  this is why i don't know i don't think that he ever feels embarrassed and i don't know if that  goes back to the social part because he didn't even know the picture had been taken because he  was standing at the urinal and it happened behind him so obviously he didn't know something had  happened for sure um and then um i did tell him about it afterwards because i just  wanted him to be aware just in case anybody said something at school yeah and so i said to him  i said so a boy came in and took a picture of you in the bathroom and then i said do you think that  that is a good thing or a bad thing like do you think someone like is that good or bad that someone should take a picture of someone in the washroom yeah he said oh that's a bad thing and i was like  yes that's right and then i basically said to him you know if you're having trouble like using the  urinal you can always use the stall and i said your principal has also said if you're more  comfortable you can use like the private washroom that can lock no one else can come in and I said but you don't have to use the private washroom if you like using that  wash like the like the main public urinal you absolutely are allowed to do it but if you are  more comfortable with the private one that's okay too um Cause I didn't want him to feel like,  oh, you're not allowed to use this. 




You have to use it.  Yes, yes.  How did you even find out?  Did the teacher notify you?  Like how did they-  Oh, the principal told me  because he had to call the police.  Like that is like a police offense.  It is.  So he-  Especially cause he's,  this has happened last year.  So he's a minority  like that's the thing that kids don't realize when you're doing stuff like that that's like  considered child pornography yeah so um the principal so i didn't find out it happened like  right after school and then i didn't find out about it until the following morning okay um and  so it was after the police had already come in to talk to the other the other child or the other  student yeah yeah this was the grade nine year so they were in grade talk to the other the other child or the other student yeah yeah this was the  grade nine year so they were in grade nine yeah um and the principal had told me yeah like if any  like part like of his body had been visible so like his bum was invisible because the sweatshirt  was long enough to cover his butt oh goodness yeah private were visible but he said if there had been  that child would have been considered a sex offender and he would be on that list even though he's underage like he's also grade nine  yeah he would have been a registered sex offender and you never come off that list  it doesn't matter that you were like 14. when it happened wow he was like yeah with the police that  came to quote the principal he's like the police came and scared the out of that kid yeah and um because they don't realize that yeah like they think oh it's  funny take this it's like no yeah like this would like and then like kids don't even realize like  you can't get a job in certain places like yes would literally destroy your life and no one's  gonna be like  oh well they were only 14 when they got on they're not gonna dig that you're not gonna  find that in the race like forget it you're on the list you're on the list oh my word i'm sure  that absolutely oh my i can't even imagine okay yeah so we're not sure if he's still doing it now  but you suspect because this was only last year yeah so i don't know i have to get my husband to kind  of like go with him and see i honestly yeah he always lets him go on his own to the washroom  i think you need next time you go to walmart see if you can get him to go and like have your  husband watch because i mean that's um that's also going to dictate when you're using washrooms  when you're on your trip yeah right um and so and just generally  speaking like you know we want to make sure that he's being safe okay so thank you for sharing that  no that's very very important information okay uh let's talk about hygiene grooming and bathing  shower you know all stuff like that is he independent with that so he independently  showers again i don't know like is he hitting all the spots you know like how how thoroughly is he cleansing all that  stuff i'm not sure of but because he again like as a habit he likes to shower every single day  so my mentality is that he's stepped into a shower every single day there's some soaping happening  yeah or it's fine yeah so he's washing his body he's able to wash his hair he can adjust water okay perfect yeah he's able to brush his teeth yes again like how well is he doing it i  don't know that's why we do it at the night time for him but in the morning he does everything on  his own okay so i'm just gonna run here uh parents um support the night time just making sure with  the flossing and the brushing you would say yeah  it's because he's had a lot of cavities in the past like when he was younger so we just kind of  want to make sure like for sure yeah no i understand that for sure um what about haircuts  how does he tolerate haircuts uh it's a lot better now um but he's just very very fidgety okay and it's like you know when they put the the little  like smock thing on you he doesn't like hair being on it but obviously hair is gonna be on it because  that's like when they cut that's where it's gonna fall so as it's there he's always like  like with his hands underneath the cave he's just it off yeah like get it fly off yeah bounce it off yeah okay  uh but otherwise he's able to do it okay what about nails is he starting to cut his own nails  no i haven't tried getting him to do that yet i wasn't sure if that was going to be like too  much like coordination well absolutely when you look at fine motor we want to make sure that he's  doing it safely yeah so i haven't I haven't gotten him to do that.  Okay. Is he able to look into the mirror? You help watch, I know you help to wash his face at night with the washcloth. Is he able to do that in the morning?  I don't think he does it in the morning.  Okay.  Does he check out his hair? Does you check out his face in the morning? I don't think that he does because sometimes it's like he's got toothpaste residue.  Like, you know, it's like kind of chalky white around his mouth.  Yeah.  In a mirror.  Yeah. So I don't think he really does.  Okay. So he doesn't.  I think again, it's about getting it done. Like.  Yes. It's about getting it off the checklist.  Yeah.  It's about getting it done.  And he doesn't like us bothering with his hair because his hair is  always covering his forehead so then I find it like it gives him acne I'll get  the bumps in it it's kind of like just try to like you know brush it to the  side of it just let it breathe a bit but every time I go like this that he's like oh and like yeah so he he doesn't like that okay and so if he did have  acne is he able to like put like creams and things like that on like is that something that you're  gonna have to help him with um i do help him with it um but i like probably in the next you know  year or something we should start just teaching him how to do that we just haven't been  okay okay and there's still some time obviously right um okay so aside from that we've talked  about that um uh showering brushing his teeth washing his hair judging his face his hair things  like that um okay is there anything else shaving uh Has he started needing to shave? I don't think so. He has whiskers, but we've just kind of let them be.  I love it. What about deodorant?  He doesn't like it if we talk about it.  What about deodorant? Yeah. Is he wearing deodorant regularly?  We haven't introduced that to his routine, but I mean, he doesn't seem to smell bad.  He's having a daily shower, so that's good, right?  But I'm just thinking,  well, I guess when he plays basketball,  is if he's a little smelly after.  He doesn't get very sweaty  because he doesn't do anything that's vigorous, you know?  Yeah, yeah.  Okay, so he's, okay, so otherwise he's doing all right.  Like, he's barely running at basketball,  so he really doesn't bring sweat.  He doesn't have the hustle in him. No there's no hustle okay uh so we're gonna talk about the  activities of uh sorry the instrumental activities of daily living so this is where we're looking at  as we're moving him towards independence so in terms of community mobility you mentioned he's  not aware of his surroundings not aware of his space um is he able to cross the street um by himself he's able to do that okay so he's able to cross  the street so yeah uh how do you feel in terms of like do you ever let him out in the community  by himself will he go to the park by himself will you ride a bike around you know okay i don't i  don't i'm not comfortable with that because I'm not confident that he can like,  again, it goes back to that problem solving. Yeah. Okay. So it's safe to say he will always have someone with him to support him and make sure that he is safe making good decisions.  And then he's, you know, doing things, his things. Okay. Yeah. Like I've let him go to like a  neighborhood playground when there've been other kids too. So they go together as a group of kids i'm okay with  that okay no i'm like going on a neighborhood walk like a group of kids okay um when we talk about  you know money management and shopping he's never purchasing things on his own he's always doing  something with you and you're trying to teach him practice ordering okay can i have a chocolate  cookie you know things like that right um he's done a bit about this year like um at school they would have like community field trips where you know they they're practicing  taking the bus so they take the bus as a group a community class right yeah and then they'll go to  like they'll take they'll take the bus two stops and go to pizzanova and then they go and they can  order something at pizzanova yeah um and then um or they'll have a field trip and then they go and they can order something at pizza nova yeah um and then um or  they'll have a field trip and like they went bowling but then they went to the mall food court  so if you want you can bring money and buy your own food yes he always takes the option to bring  a debit card to buy his own food and so i i'm pretty sure that he has support when he goes up to the counter.  Like he won't just like get sent to the counter on his own.  Yeah.  Again, the options of looking, being able to pick and making those decisions.  He's going to have support 100% of the time.  Yeah.  So that camp that he went to a couple weeks ago, that was something that one of the parents wanted her two sons to work on, like ordering their own food.  Yeah.  And so we were like, okay, yeah yeah we won't bother packing a lunch we'll get nathan to order his food too  so i said to the counselor i think after the first day i was like oh i'm like can you teach him about  combos oh because i was like i'm pretty sure when he goes with school he orders everything a la carte oh no carlo they  should be like oh she's like yes yes she's like we did kind of talk about that today i was like okay  please introduce like just the like idea that you can save money if you want if you want like the  chicken fingers the fries and a drink don't buy them separately like get them together because  it'll be cheaper because the person's not going to be like oh do you want a combo like they might yeah depending like if it was mcdonald's or something like that  yes but if you're at i don't know like jimmy the greek or some of those places they're just  okay that's what you want okay you're right yeah okay or um or he just might not understand that  lingo of like a combo or something yeah so she was like okay yeah we can work on that this week so I  think he's at least been introduced to it I it sounds like the program he's in we're gonna get  to that shortly is amazing like I love that they're even doing the community outings and  practicing things like that because that's so important right um let's talk about meal preparation  so you mentioned he can get his own snacks and he can put bread in the toaster can he make cereal um he doesn't eat cereal so we haven't really tried that but like his breakfast  foods like you know he'll have like like some of the things he likes either like breakfast pita so  he doesn't need that toasted he knows to get he knows to like go get himself a plate get the pita  out of the bag put the closure back onto the bag or another  thing that he likes is like frozen waffles so he knows to like get the  frozen waffles from the freezer put it in the toaster oven he knows how to set  it so that it's like it'll come out done so like what other appliances easy are  he is he using the toaster oven he's using just primarily the toaster oven  right yeah yeah perfect okay okay it doesn't clean up and make sure The toaster oven. He's using just primarily the toaster oven, right? Yeah.  Yeah.  Perfect.  Okay.  Okay.  Does he clean up and make sure everything's are neat after he puts things away?  He'll always put his plate in the sink.  But he won't clean up crumbs.  Okay.  And like another food thing that he'd probably do on his own, like he really likes  grapes.  So he'll go get himself a bowl get the grapes out out put them  in the bowl go wash the grapes before he um yep that's pretty much the extent of his food preparation  yeah nothing we've tried um he really likes pizza so we've tried like make your own pizza at home  yeah kind of and he's done it at school um where that was part of it and then he as homework he was  supposed to make it for the family it didn't really happen but yeah yeah and what i noticed  even if i lay it out so let's say i lay it out in order you know sauce then like toppings then cheese  yeah like he doesn't really like he needs a lot of guidance in terms of like sauce like let's spread it evenly over the let's say we're using like a pita bread. So he's just gonna like cheeses on not be like, well, we got to be good. So like, you know, a pizza's here and I'm like, okay, now the end of you want to sprinkle the cheese or like even he likes pineapple, like putting pineapple. He kind of just puts everything like right in one spot like not like nicely spread or like cheese it's like a pile  of cheese in the middle it's like no we want it like covering so he needs support in this 100  of the time someone's going to be with him okay let's talk about household chores uh i know you  said he'll fold and put his clothes away beautiful what other household chores is he will he make his  bed um he has he we don't really make our bed so we haven't done that's  okay but i was like oh maybe i should just get it like get him to do it just like you know a task  yes yes um but he he'll empty the dishwasher of certain items so we get we split up the dishwasher  between the kids like he does like the bigger items and then his sister does like the cutlery or something like that.  Yeah.  So he does that at the center.  Yeah, they've been working with him on like hand washing dishes.  So they said that he's pretty good at doing that.  Okay.  And I've gotten him to do like some vacuuming before but he's not like super thorough so you know he won't like you know how  you know when we vacuum we kind of have like a way of how we're gonna do it kind  of like a grid to make sure we 100% he's just like we have a plan so it's like up  down in this small section and then you'd go over here and then you'd yeah so he's just okay yeah let's just let's go will he what about unpacking groceries will he help  with that um uh i we don't get him to do that regularly but yeah yeah he would so we can unpack  groceries okay i don't know if you have any plants in the house would he help water the plants  we don't have plants in the house okay no that's okay if you have any pets like what do you help take care of the pets um so we don't get him to do stuff like uh letting her out to like go to the  bathroom or anything like that but we'll get him to help out with like putting her food in her bowl  in the morning yeah or like letting her  out of the crate when like when he wakes up or like when we first come back home so he'll do  things like that okay good no those are these are all aspects of slowly starting to build  responsibility right um and so that's awesome okay perfect so then let's move now so he's able to do  some some really nice things and some nice age appropriate things in some areas we know that  he's going to need a little bit more support.  Let's talk about safety and emergency responses.  So he knows his phone number.  He knows his address.  Sorry, your phone number and address, right?  Does he know to call 911 if there's an emergency?  That's something they're working on at the center this summer.  Like, you know, what to do in an emergency.  What do you do to smoke? So i think he's learning that now but when i quizzed him i'm like oh if you saw smoke or if there was  a fire like who would you call he's like i'd call for help i'm like yeah but what number would you  press and he didn't really know and i was like it's nine and he was like oh nine one one okay  so he would like he would need some well we know right off  the bat he's gonna need support with safety and emergency responses just in the sense of  that is like that's major problem solving and it's under pressure uh it's under different routines so  he knows he's gonna need full support 100 of the time uh what about if he got like a small cut  would he be able to get his own band-aid um you know we haven't tested that like we haven't yeah we  haven't seen if he could actually apply the band-aid on himself like if he got hurt is he  gonna tell you for you guys to get a band-aid or will he go get a band-aid no he'll tell us to go  like yeah he would tell us together he wouldn't get it himself okay okay so let's talk about um  health management if he was sick if he's not feeling well does he communicate that with you  my head hurts my tummy hurts my throat in like not in a lot of detail like i would have to do  i'm like does your head hurt like I'd have to be investigating okay yeah  I had a fun I'm like this this example is like a year old but like last summer we went to a friend's  cottage and he actually cut his foot like under like they have like those floating mats that are  anchored ah but underneath I think they have like I don't know what it is exactly but they look like  little shells and they attach on yeah yeah yeah yeah but they're sharp you know barnacles is that what  they're it's something like that but i don't know exactly what it is but they're like little shells  but they're sharp yeah and they'll hang on to like where it's like moist i guess yeah yeah and so it  was under but we didn't really know about it and our friend forgot to kind of like warn us about it  yeah because most people don't interact with the floating map the way that nathan was doing it he was kind of  trying to tow it but then his body would kind of go under the mat where those things were and it  basically caught up it caught up his foot oh and so they were like if this was his foot there were  like lots of like little marks yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and then so he was like and he's out on the lake on this floating mat i'm not  in the lake i'm sitting on the dock and he's like i'm hurt and then i'm like what's like he's he's  like i need a band-aid and then we were like okay what's going on um like and he couldn't explain  further like how he was hurt or he was, he might have said, I'm  bleeding but I'm like, is it like one cut like is it deep?  Because again, I was not close to him.  My friend's little girl, like she was only in like grade, going into grade two at the  time.  Yeah, she was out on the lake and she kind of swam over.  She was like, Oh, yeah, he is bleeding.  You know, kind of thing.  And then we were like, okay, like we need to get him to come back in so that we can  assess it.  And when he came back in, there were actually some cuts that were kind of deep and there  were like lots of them.  And it was like, it was bleeding.  It wasn't even just like there was a cut and there was like a little bit of blood.  Yeah.  So yeah.  Okay.  But that's all he could say. He could just say like, I'm hurt. was a cut and there was like a little bit of blood yeah so yeah okay like he still got scars from it  so but that's all he could say he could just say like i'm hurt i hurt myself it's bad it hurts  really you know like all of those like main descriptors he he didn't he didn't do anything  he wasn't even trying to come back in oh oh my because he's still sitting there he basically just  sat on top of that floating mat and he was like i'm hurt but it's like if you're  hurt like you need to come back yeah like i can't get a band-aid out to you over there yeah no  exactly um i want to move to cognitive skills so the one area that we didn't necessarily do was  looking specifically at learning and problem solving and daily life so what kind of classroom  does he participate in he's in is he in his ASD classroom or a specialized classroom?  It's at the high school that he's at. It's considered an intensive classroom. It's  kind of a misnomer because it makes it sound like it's intense, but it's not. Like the  ratio is actually quite low.  It's intensive support, is it?  It's not even intensive support because in the asd class at the  high school yeah it's like the ratio is like two or three to one adult and in his classroom like  they only have six kids in that class and they have one teacher and one or two eas in that class  of six for the asd in his intensive class you can have up to 16 or 18 kids in that class with the same one teacher two EAs ratio  wow yeah I think it's a little it's like a mid-range one yeah so I think it's also because  um in the intensive classroom it's I I like to jokingly call it like a mixed bag of like  exceptionalities yes it is it's not just autism yeah it's like down syndrome yeah cp and i don't even  know if there's some kids it's like maybe just like a learning disability and they just need a  little bit of extra support in some of their work yes yes some of the kids are working towards their  full high school diploma in there okay okay maybe it's not working towards the full diploma yes but  it's kind of nice because then it's like uh um it's  like a mix of abilities right like some of the some of the kids need less support so they're  like much more social yes that then you would get in the ASD class that's right so like I've spoken  with parents that they have their child um in an ASD classroom because they need the supports  their child is the only verbal child in the class and then you're like well how are we gonna you  know facilitate that so okay so he has an IEP with accommodations and modifications yeah so the way  that his day is structured at high school is that so there's like four periods every semester  two of the periods he's in the community class and two of the periods he goes into the mainstream and does like credit bearing classes okay  so he's doing um like i think they call them like locally developed um courses so it's not towards  like going to university or anything like that you can obtain a credit so he's working towards um  the ossc instead of the OSSD.  So it's like a certificate and you need a certain number of credits across certain subjects.  Yeah.  So that's how his day is broken up.  So when they go to the credit class, they're supposed to go with an EA.  Yes.  I think it's just, I don't know if it's just like the EA is there on standby, like should they need extra support?  Because in the beginning, the EA was like leading them to the classroom.  But then as like the school year progressed and they knew where to go, the EA hangs back a little bit more and they go to the classroom.  Like the EA is there, but not leading the way.  Okay, so I'm just going gonna say proximity of an ea okay um what  are some other supports that they're providing him so like is it repetition visual supports  things like that frequent breaks i think there's like some visual supports um maybe some time and  space if he needs it.  They haven't been super like, like detailed about it because there was also some issue with like teacher changing this year too.  Okay. Okay. Well, I can just make note that there's, there's probably some supports that are there to help with his learning. Do you feel like he's able to learn from mistakes?  Or he needs some, he needs like, he needs more repetition in order to kind of i think he needs more repetition but i know that if there's been like a hard consequence then it helps him to  remember so i can't remember exactly what happened but at one point the biggest consequence we ever  gave him was it was like no ipad for a few days or for a week or something  like that yeah and so he did remember I can't even remember what the infraction was yeah yeah  I feel like he did remember like to not do that again or to be better about it because he remembered  that he lost the iPad for like a good stretch of time no no for sure okay and you know how that goes i'm like that's more  painful for me than it is yeah i feel you on that man because like i said the benefits of it  absolutely occupies his time so one area we look at in adaptability and resilience is intense  interest so when we're looking at intense interest this is something if he's obsessed with a certain  preoccupation or a hobby that it's just it's hard to move from it's the only thing he talks about  uh it can trigger behavior it's just it's just something that is almost like a road  barrier but it's the only thing that he likes um do you feel like the ipad is to that level  or do you feel like you feel like the ipad okay yeah he always wants to have it. Okay, interest in the iPad.  And it's hard to tell what his other interests might be.  It's a barrier to his other interests.  Yeah.  Does he talk about it as well?  Um, no, not really.  Okay. Can it trigger behavior if you were like, no, it's not available right now?  This is where you're seeing the protest um yeah maybe like a why so we'll protest if denied access or  you know if there's a delay and it's hard when i'm like you need to find something else to do  you need a break because you've had it a lot um a rule that i was trying to put in was like if you like he would sit  there with it being charged and still on it i'm like no if it needs to charge right now you need  to turn it off you can't be on it right now because it's not going to charge if you continue  like i mean i know it will continue to charge but i'm like it's not going to charge it's going to  charge slower right yeah for sure but then it's really hard when i'm like find  something else to do and he's like he'll like almost choose to just like lie there and do  nothing okay so this is something that you have to provide a lot of support with like he will  like he's literally not engaging with anything else and just waiting yeah or not and i'll give  him options i'm like you can go look at a book you could go play with your toys in your room, you could play with the Lego, we could play a game. I can give him lots of options, but he's just like, no.  Okay, so I've captured that. In terms of our capacity for resilience, this is our ability to bounce back when, you know, it's like you had the iPad taken away, now you can have it back or whatever the case may be how long does it take him to move on from things um you mean like for example if i took away the ipad well any and  anything let's say he's had a protest behavior he's had where he was really upset and now it's  like how long is it going to take him to calm down and kind of restore the peace and calm again it can kind of vary but i feel like  it could even take like 20 minutes or something like that 15 more than 15 minutes 15 to 20 minutes  it can be a totally be arranged 15 15 to 20 minutes yeah calm down yeah is he able to do that  still talk about it like kind of like oh it's like oh why was why is there no basketball today or like yeah like he like a  lot of things a lot of plans obviously have changed because they may be weather dependent  he's like why does it have to rain and he'll kind of like perseverate and keep coming back to it  he might not be at the same amplified level but he'll keep he's still he's still talking about it  yeah we're persevering on topics can he move on without you or does he need outside help to talk  him through to be like it's okay and distract and help him to move on i think he still needs  support with that okay what are some what are the ways that you're going to help him to kind of like  move on um like i know talking and giving him maybe time and space yeah yeah if he's like really worked up you know  i'll remind him of his strategies you know like you know counting to 10 or taking deep breaths or  another thing they had said was like squeezing lemons you know like if you're feeling frustrated  yeah um yeah okay and a lot of times he does grab like go for those strategies on his own without  being prompted.  Cause I've noticed other times when he's been upset,  I'll notice he'll be like,  and he'll start breathing himself.  And I haven't said it.  Good.  But you're still finding that there's some element that you will have to  kind of come in and step in a little bit.  Yeah.  Cause I think just by the self-regulation piece,  like we know he's not there yet.  In terms of his understanding and processing different feelings,  we know that he needs help in this.  Okay.  And just by nature, he perseverates a lot.  Like, whether it's, like, positive or negative, he just does.  He just keeps thinking about this.  Okay.  Yeah.  Let's talk about the response to sensation.  So everyone experiences the world differently.  It has different feelings about different textures and materials,  sights, sounds, and all of that.  What is, what's something for, you know,  for Nathan that we have to be on the lookout for?  It's hard to say because it's not always consistent.  Okay.  Sometimes it seems like some sounds bother him,  but then other times we're in loud sounds and it's  okay. So I can't  like... I can say that  sometimes some sounds are bothering  him. Okay. That's okay. I would say  of anything, you're probably more of like a sound  thing. He also doesn't like it if his  clothing gets wet.  But when he was younger, that was an issue  because he'd want to take it off right away.  And he'd disrobe. Yeah. And now we're not seeing necessarily the disrobing but he's going to be uncomfortable  and complain about it yeah so like let's say his like his shorts got wet and was kind of like on  the leg part he would like roll it up so it's like rolled up so high but it's because then he's  rolled it up to the point where he can't feel where it's wet anymore because he doesn't want that feeling okay so that's something so he's able to manage that  okay what about um like is he using headphones certain smells bother him certain food textures  things like that um no food textures maybe maybe food texture sometimes like he I just don't we don't force him to try like new stuff all the  time so um yeah I tried to offer him something new I think last week was something his sister  wanted to have and it was something called like deep fried milk and I said what he's like what  is that and then I said it's deep fried milk I was like try one and he's like I don't like that  drink but it was like literally a solid item in front of him and I was like it's not a drink but he heard milk because  of the it's like milk is not supposed to be solid so why is it solid yeah but he was like I don't  like that drink yeah I don't know I don't know if I'd try that either that sounds interesting I  don't know okay so what about we said there's no sensitivity with clothing.  No issues with clothing necessarily per se aside from the clothes potentially being wet.  Okay, so he's able to manage, you know that so that's that's a good sign right.  We in terms of when we look at the supports. So then let's look at repetitive movement patterns or self stimulatory behavior. So I know we're going to capture the scripting to himself um is is a part of a stim is engaging in anything physical hand rocking body movement flapping you know things like that um he he does like to jump a lot okay so like jump around or  he'll like make sometimes he makes like audit like sounds make some vocalizations yeah okay like not  often I feel like he mostly does it if he's  like happy which makes me feel bad when i try to tell him to stop because i'm like oh it's a happy  sound but you know yeah um i know it's hard right um how often is he generally speaking engaging in  this any of this type of this stimming behavior it's happening daily right yeah daily yeah daily  and is it for a long period of  time well it might be for like five minutes at a time kind of thing um i don't know it's hard  for me to say maybe at least okay it depends if i've like tried to stop him i'm also gonna  know here it's mostly at home right because he's not i mean he does he does do the jumping and  skipping around like when we're like out too oh he does okay yeah okay so i'll make note that's  happening in both in different environments okay uh in terms of awareness of internal states of  the body we've talked a little bit about this so he knows when he's hungry he knows when he's full  he knows when he's thirsty uh he knows when he needs to use the washroom he knows when he's sick  uh you mentioned he doesn't like being hot will he tell you if he's too hot or too cold  i don't i don't think he'll say it no way i've never heard him talking about being too cold  um the hot i just know he doesn't like because when we've been in climates where it's been hot,  I find that he always either seeks the shade or he'll seek an air-conditioned venue.  I'm right there with him.  Straight up, I'm right there with him.  But he's not explicitly told you.  Like, would he, like, if he, you know, like, I want you to think of the early parts of the summer  or the end of the spring parts of the summer or the  the end of the spring where it would be like 10 degrees in the morning and then it would jump up  to like 25 would he know to like take off a sweater or take off a coat like would he know  or you need to cue him okay i probably need to cue him or he just wouldn't wear the coat to begin  with i feel like cold doesn't bother him as much as hot okay like in the winter he'll be like why can't i  wear a t-shirt i'm like well because it's cold yeah or like he'll wear the jacket but he doesn't  love wearing like a winter coat and he definitely will not zip it up okay i'm not but I also feel like that's kind of a teenager thing too, right?  I don't know.  Yeah.  Short flip-flops.  I don't know why.  I was never one of those ones.  I was one of those people that likes to like  tuck in their shirt underneath the sweater  and like no one could see it  because I was wearing a hoodie  and I was like, I am staying warm.  I don't know if that's a girl thing though too, right?  But would he, like if he was cold  and his hands were red because he wasn't wearing gloves would he tell you like my hands are  cold can we go inside i don't know because we've never had that situation because he'll like put  his hands like in his pocket or something like that because his hands actually aren't cold in  the winter hmm interesting i'm trying to gauge like the safety risk yeah i don't like are you  concerned about that like is that something that you're like I'm afraid he's gonna get too cold and not say something um I think because we haven't had  that situation then I just haven't been concerned about it because maybe in my head I'm thinking  like if he's cold he'll like do something about it like even if he doesn't tell me like that his  hands are warm it's like he put them in a pocket  somewhere or he like come up in a sleeve yeah yeah as opposed to just like leaving them out to the  elements yes yes yeah no for sure taking care of that so well he's managing it right like he's not  he isn't complaining about any injuries okay okay um so the last section we're going to look at is  our mental health so we know our mental health is our psychological and our emotional well-being it affects our behavior  our moods um just before we go into that because i think we we kind of started going in on like the  safety thing yeah yeah i wanted to know that like we have left him at home alone like for periods  but yeah again my husband is like more comfortable with it than  I am because for me I'm not convinced or confident that in an emergency he's gonna know what to do  yes no I've made note of that but he can absolutely be home by himself and if like everything's hunky  dory and like nothing is happening and he's just like how long so how long is he left alone for  my husband has left him  for like two hours before because he went to go on a run okay um um and again like nothing happened  so it's fine yeah um but like so i know that if he's home on his own and let's say he has an online  session yeah he absolutely can go he can keep track of the time go log himself in  the only thing though is if there's like some kind of a connection issue he's gonna he doesn't  know how to solve yeah he can't problem solve that or um like so that aspect of it but i know that he  can like sign in on his own when he's done he like has his reward time of  either like playing his animal crossing or going on the ipad so all of that he can he can do and  like the times when I haven't been home when he's come home from school I know that he can unlock  the door lock the door back up and like do what he needs to do like not just sit there in the dark like waiting for me to come back  yeah um but it's just yeah it's the it's the safety aspect yeah yeah no for sure so i've like  in terms of in community mobility like i've noted that um but in terms of like the management the  safety management of when we're looking at god forbid something were to happen like he was he  used the toaster oven and for some reason god forbid like what was that showy this is us when it like it sparked the crock  pot you know you know and that's like well would he know what to do in that situation and i think  that i think you and i both can agree that we're not confident that he would be able to do it  and so that i i've noted that he would need full support in that area to make sure that he's  managing and making the right decisions whether that that be like, you know, in how to  access the phone and dialing 911 and being, you know, in all of that, there's a lot of  skills that are needed in all of that.  And he needs help in that area.  So yeah, I want to make sure I've definitely got that.  Yeah.  Okay.  So yeah, so mental health.  So do you feel like, pardon me, he's displaying any  depressive like behaviors, sleeping a lot, um, not wanting to eat, not enjoying things that he  used to like. So all of a sudden, okay, no concerns. Right. No. Excellent. Any mood changes.  And we look at them as really severe mood swings, not just like your kind of typical thing. So,  um, really, really happy,  almost like euphoric, and then swinging to like almost explosive irritability.  No. Okay, perfect. Any thoughts or beliefs that are not based in reality, hallucinations,  thinking people are out to get him, someone's watching him, nothing like that, right?  Okay, perfect. Then we talk about anxieties and fears.  Does he have any reoccurring thoughts or worries that kind of bother him? I've noted in this area  what you've talked a little bit about the OCD type behavior, because that is something that  is captured. So I have captured that the daily routine. So I've noted here that certain routines  that need to be completed, sorry, it happens daily daily you haven't necessarily interrupted the routine to see like if  he would have an adverse reaction but it's on your radar and you're watching  it anything outside of that not really I think it's more like his anxiety is like  coming from like a schedule change it's not like a constant worry about like the  future or  um you know how people might perceive him or something like that yeah it's around the  unpredictability if there's something changing yeah okay I'll make sure to capture that for  sure uh we look at the experience of being bullied in the last 30 days or especially at the last you  know month of that school um any concerns reported from the  classroom he's in a nice classroom where there's lots of support and they're making sure that he's  okay okay perfect yeah and even like like i haven't heard of any instance of bullying even  like in last year in grade nine when that thing happened with the photo yeah um it's not like he  experienced any kind of like um you know repercussions from that yeah or confrontational kind of type thing  with it or anyone seeing as far as i know anything saying anyone saying anything to him but they've  told the principal has told me that it's not like uh like at the school they always have an adult  with them like even at lunch time in the cafeteria there's always like a staff i i'm really happy to hear that because i  some of the bullying that's happening in some schools is just it's terrible and these children  do not deserve it um so i'm glad okay good like i was like oh if we're gonna like like look at a  silver lining of anything like even after that picture got posted, the principal told me that immediately, like at least five students came to the office  to report it to him.  Really?  And then he said that even though you can't see Nathan's face,  because it's just from the back.  Yeah.  Some students, some of the students that came to the office  knew it was Nathan.  Like they could recognize him from the back.  And they were like, think to the principal,  they were like, why would someone do this?  And like, why would someone do this to him? Oh my, warms my heart yes absolutely it's like a vulnerable person so why  would you do that yeah um yeah so i mean i was like yeah like uh like very thankful that it kind  of just stayed yeah kind of minor and there was a bigger issue yeah and hopefully there's some students there that are  like looking up because that is no i i i i'm sure that i'm much i'm sure that you learned a very  harsh lesson very quickly to balance out some of the bad stuff that you might be hearing about stuff  going on oh my goodness i know for real like a boy was in the bathroom at the time, like a witness to it, and immediately ran from the bathroom to the principal's office.  Wow.  And reported that a boy took a picture of another boy in the bathroom.  Good.  Good.  I'm glad to hear that.  We need to hear that more often, right?  Whenever we look at the effects of trauma.  So please know, Kathy, you don't have to go into any details about anything.  But we look at a significant negative event or a series of events that might be causing him distress now could be the loss of a family member could be a car accident  anything where it's affecting him now um no okay perfect this is going to sound like a silly  question but maybe not because he's a little bit older uh but we look at the substance use is he  engaging in smoking drinking curiosity with any illicit drugs or things like that no okay perfect oh um and then we look at disordered eating so we've talked a little  bit about this in the sense of like we don't have any concerns with binge type eating he knows when  he's full perhaps maybe some ocd type behaviors about having specifically three plates but like  he can identify when he's full when he's hungry he's eating more than 20 food items. So there's no major concerns in that area. Okay, perfect. Okay, excellent. All right. So I've completed the part  that's related to funding. So the next part is not related to funding. It's called the needs  additional factors. They're simply yes, no questions. And they're just looking at getting  a little bit more information about other needs that potentially exist. So in terms of family  constellation, we look at if you needed a break  um you want you're just like this is a lot today right now you know do you have someone who can lean on for respite if you needed it yes or no um yeah i guess so yeah okay i guess so like  like in terms of quality like it's not like someone who's like to like fully engage him  but just someone to be like present yeah yeah make sure he doesn't get into like trouble or  something like that yes okay in terms of where you live do you feel like where  you live is safe and that you have easy access to services yes okay perfect do  you feel stress anxiety worry burnout of what's to come? Oh, yes. Most parents say yes.  Yes.  In terms of work, your ability or inability to work in terms of meeting schedules and  things like that.  Is that something that's factored in?  Yes.  So I don't work like a typical nine to five.  Okay.  Like I don't even work full time so that I have more flexibility.  No, for sure.  Okay.  In terms of school, he's there Monday to Friday full time.  Yes.  Okay.  Okay, good.  Uh, right.  We've talked about that.  So he is in grade.  Uh, he finished grade 10.  So he's going into grade 11 in September.  Goodness.  I know.  Oh my goodness.  Um, and is, is he showing signs of puberty?  Yes.  Yes. Some facial hair happening all right um and he's he's currently 15 so he's not going to be an adult for a little while so we  don't have to worry about the transition to adulthood just yet next year you will though  next year for our things we need to like start to apply for when they turn 16 so i guess it's ready for  when they're yeah so when you're when you connect with your service navigator um i want you to you  can bring that up and she'll let you know shanna yeah let her know um that yeah so like as he gets  closer to that age there's certain things change in terms of where the funding goes going and  certain supports and things like that so So absolutely touch base. Um,  and there's lots of resources cause it's a big transition and so they'll be able  to help you through that. So not to worry. Um, and then just at the end here,  we'd like to just kind of do a quick summary of where the strengths and where  the priorities are. So in terms of the priorities,  I feel like the social skills is a pretty large one. Um, I, you know,  working on like picking up on those, those social cues.  I also feel like i'm gonna write  communication and this again doesn't determine where you're using your funding again it's just  to kind of like help prioritize but i feel like the communication and self-regulation especially  because it's like the emotional piece getting him to kind of express and talk a little bit more i  think is going to be really helpful um and then i think just move of activities towards independence  really um you know looking at how we kind of build that up especially when it comes to like safety And then I think just move activities towards independence, really.  You know, looking at how we kind of build that up, especially when it comes to like safety and learning between appropriate and inappropriate behaviors. I think I think that that's an important piece. Yeah.  OK. And then my last question for you is going to be a hard one um what makes you proud where are his strengths  um what are his strengths i mean he i'd say that like even though he can be bound to a schedule or like a habit i do find that that's the strength of his because then it helps him  to be like um you know organized in the sense of knowing what he needs and where he needs to be somewhere.  Yeah. And his like, not wanting to be late, like he always needs to be on time. So he kind of helps  me in that regard. Yeah. So I feel like that's a real strength. He's got a nice sense of,  pardon me, sense of humor. Yeah humor yeah yeah so i think another strength is  like you know even when you were asking all those questions about like depression and i was like you  know like maybe there's just something to be said for like i don't want to call him oblivious but  kind of having a little bit of that like not thinking too much about like those bigger things or even just like he is very happy like he's a very like happy kid  and people always tell me that that he's just like you know he's like very smiley he's always  generally in a good mood um I think that that that's pretty good because I know like other  parents are shared with me oh like you know their child might be very aware of their differences and i don't think the neighborhood like really thinks about like the  ways in which he's different from other kids yes yes so that's been like a blessing too because  then absolutely he worries about yeah no i agree he just sounds like an absolute delight and as  much as him and his sister i think that they also have like that's also a strength is like his relationship with his sister i mean as much as  they must bug each other i think that you know that's something that he can rely on right and  he's in tune to her right um yeah and so i think that that's something that's very special to to  note as well okay i'm very happy to say and we did it within our time frame so good for us we've  completed our determination of these yeah  i gotta tell you this is my shortest one yet the last two were like bang on four hours last year was even like like five minutes past i got you i got you i got you girl you're all good so you know  the process so you're gonna get that message you have your appointment uh you're gonna get those  reminders of when it is your appointment with uh with shanna so i think it's august the 22nd just because of vacations  and things like that i'm sure that that's what they had um so you know what to do with the  agreement eligible expenses she'll be able to answer any of those questions make sure to make  note about um as he's getting closer to be turning 18 she can set you up with some nice resources  with that um otherwise if you don't have any other questions for me  just thank you so much it's been an absolute pleasure chatting with you um i think that nathan is such a delight and he's going to be such a just just he's going to thrive he's going to do  really well and i wish you all the best in the summer and just all the best for september yeah  thank you so much allison not a problem it was. It was very, very light and easier this year.  The last, I've kind of been dreading it a bit because I was like, oh, like the last  two times has been very emotional.  And okay, good.  I'm glad that I was able.  I always tell parents it's intended to be a conversation.  And yes, there's, you know, I can see why parents struggle with this because it's a  lot to talk about, especially when you're talking about the areas of need um and you know to kind of go into all those details but  sometimes there's like you said that that silver lining when you notice hey he's doing lots of  really positive things and you know and it's important to highlight that and to celebrate  those small successes and those gains because they add up to something big later on right  so i'm very happy that i was able to help that along for you, Kathy. I wish you all the best and just take care and enjoy  the rest of the day. Okay. You too. Take care. Okay. Bye-bye."